HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 13:30 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Hello, hello. Just while everyone’s settling in, just to remind
everyone to please state their names when speaking for
transcript purposes. It’s so much better being able to identify
who actually said something as opposed to man, woman, man,
woman. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

I’m Alan Greenberg, Chair of the ALAC, and I’d like to welcome
you to one of our rooms I’m tempted to say let’s do a round
robin [and have] everyone introduce each other and say what
your interests are and that would easily use up the whole
session. So what I’m going to suggest is as anyone speaks, if
you’re speaking for the first time, you can add one sentence to
your name to explain who you are or why you’re here or what
your main interests are. And I’m now going to turn it over to Greg
to introduce our first topic.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

GREG SHATAN:

EN

Greg Shatan. I’m the President of the Intellectual Property
Constituency and also an end user. Yes, I am. I’m also a member
of the ISOC New York Chapter which I think may make me a
member of a structure as well. And the first time I actually tried
to join ICANN was probably back in like 2001 when I think I
joined the individual group when it was back in the old days, but
that didn’t stick. So somehow I ended up in the IPC.
In any case, given that we have a new format for these new
meetings, we thought we’d try something new and have
bilateral meetings. And I think that kind of fruitful discussions
between ALAC and IPC members about what we can do together
here in the ICANN framework will be very helpful. Batted around
a number of topics and it’s always good to pick one to start
because then you avoid spending several minutes talking about
topics – which does not mean this is not the only or the best
topic, but it is a topic about which to talk – is about compliance
and the like.
I will say, certainly from the point of view of the IPC, part of what
we do, part of what we’re looking to protect, are the interests of
consumers and avoiding fraud and deception. So in that case,
we’re not so far apart at all. And so I’m just going to throw the
floor open for that, or I’ll throw the floor to the other Chair.

Page 2 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

I’m going to take this opportunity to reveal a secret. A few
people know the secret. Probably not many in this room. One or
two may know it. I started in ICANN 10 years ago almost, and
one of the first things I took up as a banner – because it was
something that had been discussed within ALAC before I got
there but no one [inaudible] anything – was a little thing called
domain tasting.
If you’re old enough you know about domain tasting. It was a
concept by which you could buy a domain, monetize it, see if it
worked, if it didn’t work, throw it back, and it would cost you
nothing. And people did this by the tens of millions. And the
ALAC ended up initiating a PDP which addressed domain tasting.
That was a collaborative effort of the ALAC and the IPC.
It was a secret. We weren’t allowed to tell anyone because of all
sorts of reasons, but it was a very much a collaborative effort
and a very successful one. So I wouldn’t mind having that
happen again. That doesn’t mean we agree at all times. But
every once in a while our interests intersect and we really should
take advantage of that. So with that, I’ll open.

GREG SHATAN:

This should not be a dialog between Alan and I, although Alan
and I have had many good dialogs including the fact that we
share another thing which may be a secret to some, is that we’re

Page 3 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

in a sense both Canadian Jews with roots in Montreal. Alan is out
about it, out and proud. I’m kind of in the [inaudible] Outremont
[Jon Monts de Lippe] Park, Schwartz’s, and most importantly,
San Viateur, not Fairmount.

ALAN GREENBERG:

I think Leon wants to talk about the real subject we’re here for.
Leon.

LEON SANCHEZ:

Thank you very much, Alan. Thank you, Greg. I’m Leon Sanchez.
I’m a member of the ALAC and also a proud member of the IPC.
Actually my first contact with ICANN was through the IPC and
then I joined the ALAC.
Based on the meeting that we held yesterday, I think that the
outcome that I got from the meeting is that at least all the
involved parties in the discussion on compliance are willing to
actually sit on the table and with an open-minded mindset,
willing to find a solution for the common problems that were
discussed yesterday.
And my experience in these years in ICANN is that the interests of
both users and rights holders are not in conflict as we usually
think. We have more coincidences and more common interests
than differences between us. So I really applaud this initiative of

Page 4 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

having both the ALAC and the IPC work collaboratively and
openly again. And I think that I don’t want to put Garth on the
spot but I see he’s got his tent card up anyway. He’s done a lot of
work in analyzing how compliance has not complied to what
they are supposed to comply with. So I think it’s an excellent
opportunity for Garth to actually tell us a little bit more about
the work you’ve done, Garth, because it’s the main issue that
we’re trying to discuss here.

GARTH BRUEN:

Thank you, Leon. This is Garth Bruen from ALAC North America.
And you did ask me to be here, so you’re not putting me on the
spot. And Greg also discussed this with me last night a little bit.
So, many of you know me. Some of you may not be aware that I
teach Cybercrime at Fisher College in Boston, and this past
semester I had my students collaborate on a research project.
And their research project was to document how easy it is to
purchase narcotics online, specifically opioids – a category of
extremely powerful drugs which are usually supposed to be only
under a doctor’s care. And many of the drugs that were used in
the research are only to be administered in a hospital. But these
were all easily available through various websites. Most of them
were gTLDs. Very, very few of them were ccTLDs. And 65% of

Page 5 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

them were actually through registrars in the United States where
the law actually currently prohibits this type of activity.
And the way that the law is structured in the United States – it’s
not even about whether or not the site actually sells and delivers
a narcotic product, it’s actually a violation for them to claim to
be a pharmacy and offer narcotics without a prescription. That
in and of itself, the representation of the website, is a violation of
the law in the United States. So one would think that it should
be relatively impossible for somebody to have a website in the
United States, a domain name that is dealing in narcotics. But
it’s obviously extremely easy.
Something that’s of particular interest to the IPC is the number
of trademark violating domain names which were found in our
study. Specifically ones that imitated well-known pharmacy
brands – Walgreens and CVS were among them.
So, of course, there is a process for dealing with these trademark
infringing domains. This process takes a long time, and during
this period these sites continue to sell narcotics. The reason I
picked narcotics is because it is probably the most obvious and
egregious negative transaction that somebody can do on the
Internet, the most harmful one. So one would think that
enforcement would be readily available to deal with it. But the
fact is that it isn’t.

Page 6 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

We’ve been told many times that ICANN is not the content
police. And complaints about these types of sites are readily
rejected by ICANN out of hand. They’re not interested in dealing
with them. I would say that this is not about content, this is
about transactions. This is ultimately about transactions. This is
a relationship that ICANN has with Internet users and consumers
through its contracted parties where the transactions actually
become harmful. And the fact that ICANN has not taken on a
consumer-oriented agenda in terms of protecting consumers
from certain harms is the real problem. And I think that we can
work together to make this happen for real. Between IPC and
between At-Large, we can make this truly happen and really
protect people. Thank you.

GREG SHATAN:

I don’t have a tent card. I’ll respond briefly. I agree greatly and I
think it points out how trademark infringement is often a
gateway to other negative activity on the Internet because
trademark represents a reputation and it represents – infringing
a trademark hijacks a company’s reputation and simulates trust.
Doesn’t stimulate, it simulates trust which is how you suck
someone in. It’s a gateway drug so to speak to the pharming and
the phishing and the malware and the like, especially simulating
a commercial transaction. So that’s kind of how we’re on the tip
of the spear.

Page 7 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

And I would say that looking at two other words that have
gotten tossed around a lot here for various reasons – security,
stability, and resiliency, is supposed to be important and the
security issue more importantly, and unfortunately I don’t think
Jonathan Zuck is with us or David Taylor, two members of our
group who are serving on the CCT Review. But the CCT – the T is
there for consumer trust, and issues like the one that you’re
bringing up go to the heart of trust in the Internet and the ability
of people to go to the Internet and not leave it with a negative
experience or losing their identity or enabling transactions that –
I’m not sure which is worse, to be able to buy a controlled
substance over the Internet or to be fooled into thinking that
you can and then having something else happen to you. So just
some thoughts.

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

Okay, my name is Vanda Scartezini. I’m from different from you.
I used to be President of Patent Office in Brazil, but nowadays
I’m a just user. But I’d like to raise one point that is concerning
me from the south part of the world. It’s the possibility to
domain names to lose importance because of the lack of trust of
the users. And this will in the medium term allow users to get
another way to get access to all these features that is the new
[words].

Page 8 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

This is not only a risk for ICANN business, is a risk for business for
all of us. So we need to pay attention on the consumer trust
much more than we are doing now, because we can lose all the
users that we have as a business [and all] like ICANN or all
lawyers around and all the registries and registrar issues
because the domain because with the new gTLDs, they are
feeling more uncomfortable. A lot of problems that is coming
from the new gTLDs are impacting users more than used to do.
And the trust they used to have maybe impact too much and
maybe it’s not difficult technically to go through another ways
and enter into e-commerce and other issues they normally use
without a domain. So there is some concern to think about and
think about how we can improve consumer trust to not lose our
clients. Thank you.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks. The floor is open. We have a roaming mic here, so we
will roam to you. Or a standing mic which you can stand at.
Which if taken out of its stand can become a roaming mic.

ALEX DEACON:

Thank you. My name is Alex Deacon with the Motion Picture
Association. I just want to make a comment about something
Garth mentioned earlier. You said it’s not about content, it’s
about transaction.

Page 9 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

The way I look about it that it’s not about content or so-called
illegal content, it’s about conduct. It’s about illegal and unlawful
conduct. That’s the things that we really care about. And when
we talk about illegal content or being the content police, I think
that kind of muddies the water and it distracts from the real
issue which is protecting consumers from illegal conduct. And
that’s where I think the focus should be.

GREG SHATAN:

Steve?

STEVE METALITZ:

Thank you. Steve Metalitz. I’m the Vice President of the IPC. Just
to go back to some of the earlier comments starting with Alan’s,
yes, we – IPC and ALAC – have worked together on a number of
issues over the years. You mentioned one. Holly and I have
worked together for a long time on WHOIS issues and others.
I think it is good if we can identify another issue that we can
work on together. And certainly the compliance issue could well
be one of them.
It might be worth just talking a little bit about how IPC has
approached this so you get an understanding of where we’re
coming from on it. I think compliance has probably been the one
constant thread – well, it’s not the one – but it’s been a constant

Page 10 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

thread through our IPC activities going back to the earliest days
of ICANN. And so for example, during the regular meetings – not
the Meeting B schedule here that we’re in, which by the way the
advantage of this Meeting B schedule is just to make it possible
to have meetings like this all the more easily. So we should do
this again even after we go back into the other framework. But
our norm has been to have a briefing from ICANN Compliance at
every one of our IPC meetings at the ICANN meetings. And
sometimes that’s a very short briefing and just kind of update of
what’s happening and sometimes it gets into a little more detail
to delve into current issues and so forth. We can also raise our
concerns, and over the years we have done so in many, many, of
these meetings.
So we’re very familiar with the compliance system and we’ve
had a number of ongoing issues to discuss there. And we’ve also
been very actively involved, to the extent we can be, in the
negotiation of the contracts that we’re talking about ICANN
doing compliance activities around. I say to the extent we can
because, of course, we’ve never been in the room when these
contracts are negotiated but they have been put out for public
comment, the Registrar Accreditation Agreement was, the Base
Registry Agreement was. The Base Registry Agreement is out
even now for some amendments.

Page 11 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

So that’s another activity – and that obviously goes directly to
compliance, it also goes to the issues that people have been
talking about here with the kind of research that Garth and his
colleagues have done and the illegal conduct that Alex
mentioned – so at least it provides some framework for trying to
deal with that.
So again, I think this has been something that we’ve been pretty
continually engaged in. So if there is general agreement that this
an area of common interest – which at least these initial
comments seem to indicate – then we should be thinking about
how we can operationalize that or is there a particular aspect of
this that we can best work on together.
I’ll just mention one, and this may not be the best one to work
on now, but it is timely. And that is that in the Base Registry
Agreement proposed amendments, there is a provision about
giving ICANN the unfettered discretion to reduce fees for
registries in the new gTLD environment. But it’s at ICANN’s sole
discretion, and I know some people have suggested that maybe
this would be a way to give registries incentives to be more
responsive, more proactive in dealing with the kinds of abuses
that we’ve been talking about and that they could be rewarded
for that with fee reductions. It’s an idea that’s worth exploring.

Page 12 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

But the other point that I think it would be interesting to talk
with ALAC about is the fact that, I mean, the new gTLDs are
important and as Vanda said, they do present risks and so forth
that we have to be very aware of. But right now I’m guessing –
and Garth, correct me if I’m wrong – he pointed out that very
little of this is in the ccTLDs in his research but I bet relatively
little of it is in the new gTLDs either. And that the problems
remain, as they have been throughout the history of the domain
name system, primarily in the legacy gTLDs. These are problems
in .com and .net and .org and to some extent in some of the
gTLDs that were added by ICANN in its first two rounds.
So the fact is that those agreements don’t have a lot of the
provisions that are in the Base Registry Agreement for the new
gTLDs that can be our hook for compliance activities. If you look
at the .com agreement, there’s nothing in there about dealing
with these issues effectively. So that might be an area that we
could fruitfully discuss. There are a number of ways to approach
this, but it seems if most of the problem is in .com, .net, .org, and
the other legacy gTLDs, and if those are the areas where right
now the compliance tools are weakest because there’s so little
that could be done at least at the registry level under the
contracts, maybe that’s an interesting area to look at and to see
about what we could do together to try to change that situation

Page 13 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

and put some real teeth into the registry agreements in the
legacy environment.
So I just throw out those two examples. One is a short term one
because the Base Registry Agreement is out for comment right
now – in fact, just for the next two weeks I think. But the other
one is obviously a longer term project. But it might be worth
considering. Thanks.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks, Steve. Holly and then Paul.

HOLLY RAICHE:

Thanks. First of all, I agree with Vanda. I think new gTLDs do
present a particular challenge because the name is going to
suggest something it may or may not do. But I think Steve is
probably right that there’s plenty of mischief in the existing. I
know that Garth has spent a lot of time working – I’d like to say
with compliance but I don’t think I will – I think we need to
understand what else has to happen to stop the sort of obvious
mischief and the harm. And I think that that’s probably the best
place for this group to start, because actually this is what really
does impact users. Thanks.

Page 14 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

GREG SHATAN:

Paul and then Alan.

PAUL MCGRADY:

Paul McGrady. I’m one of the Counselors for the IPC on the GNSO
Council, but a Washington D.C. ISOC member and only because
Chicago is apparently way too small to have its own chapter.
Which is like super embarrassing, right? I know.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Start one.

PAUL MCGRADY:

There you go. Yeah, on my spare time.
We sort of have an on-ramp here between what Steve and Holly
have both said, focusing on the legacy TLDs and Holly said
something really important which is that we have to start
thinking proactively, that all the mechanisms in this space are
reactive, they’re not preventative. And I really think that we’re
mature enough now as an organization to start thinking, “How
do we prevent this?” not just how do we address it when it
happens, right? And so I just wanted to capture that momentum.
I think that that’s really important.
And also to a certain extent I think if the new gTLD registries
were here, they might say something like, “Yeah, that’s part of

Page 15 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

an equal playing field, too.” So I’m going to put the equal
playing field part of the on-ramp and hope to keep building that
because I think that we’ve captured something really important
here. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

A couple of things. There have been some efforts in ICANN to
move some of the terms of the new gTLD contracts into the
legacy ones. And they have focused on, among other things, the
vertical integration which clearly some of the registries wanted
to see there. And I’m a little bit perturbed that we’re talking
about a new Base Registry Agreement that doesn’t consider
some of these leveling the playing field. And I know some of
them are rights protection ones which will be considered under
the Rights Protection PDP, but there are other ones that fall
under the categories that we’re talking about. So I’m a little bit
perturbed. I’m not quite sure what we should do about it. That’s
number one.
Number two – and I’m a little bit out of date on it because the
discussion I’m going to talk about happened a year plus ago –
you’re no doubt aware that the ALAC has been pretty closely
aligned with the GAC on the protection mechanisms on highly
regulated TLD strings. And one of our issues that we have raised
regularly is that on some of these TLDs and some of these

Page 16 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

registries with virtually no protection whatsoever and strong
motivations in the registry to get as many registrations that they
can, that they are potential homes for a lot of problems.,
whether it’s related to trademark abuse or spam or phishing or
whatever. The answer that came back from the registry
community at the time was, “We don’t see that problem
happening.”
And that’s not surprising. The statistics that the anti-phishing
group and others have done on the incidence of malfeasance as
it were on the traditional TLDs is things like one in 10,000 or
whatever. I don’t remember the exact numbers. When you apply
that to the number of registrations the new TLDs had had, it’s
not particularly surprising we haven’t seen a problem. If it’s one
in 10,000 and they’ve only had 9,000 registrations – those aren’t
the exact numbers – but things like that, or one in a million and
they’re nowhere near there, it’s not surprising it’s not a major
problem. It’s not surprising that they’ve even can claim they – at
that point anyway – they had never had a single complaint.
But if any of these TLDs are successful – now we all know
bunches of them won’t be, but some of them presumably will be
– and therefore we will see incidents of these things going on.
And I think what we’re seeing right now is just the fact that
there’s an awful lot more .coms than anything else. And it’s not
surprising that the problems are happening there. But if and

Page 17 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

when any of the new TLDs are successful, chances are we’re
going to see different rules, different results.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks, Alan. Anybody else? Garth, I see your tent.

GARTH BRUEN:

Thanks. I don’t want to occupy the floor, but to respond to what
Steve said or to confirm what Steve said, .com overshadows
everything else in our research. But to Vanda’s point, there are
specific new gTLDs that are problem spots and they’re actually
easily identifiable. I mean, we can go down a list of 10 or 20
where all these issues are happening. So it’s not like it’s an
unsolvable or it’s a problem that we can’t find easily. We know
where it’s happening. We have to talk about it and come up with
a solution.
To go into what Holly asked about, is what kind of action should
we be taking? I think that there’s an overarching problem of –
it’s a structural problem – of ICANN in that ICANN is conflicted
internally in terms of the way that it would enforce the rules. I
mean, compliance is basically part of a business. Their business
is selling domain names. It’s very, very, difficult for a division to
enforce its rules upon itself which end up reducing its own
income. I think that this would be a problem anywhere.

Page 18 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

Compliance really should be outside the organization. We have
to figure out a way that it could be better structured, but this
model is not really something which is responsive to the
community in a meaningful way. They’re just too tethered to the
business side of things. So that’s one suggestion.
There are a number of problems which are not really – I don’t
know if they’re considered contractual or not – but one thing
that I see over and over again are suggestion engines on
resellers and registrar sites where you enter a domain name that
you want to buy and let’s say it contains a trademark string. This
particular domain might not be available, but these suggestion
engines will give you list of 50, 100, thousands of different
possibilities containing that trademark string. Why are they even
offering this as a service?
One thing that I’ve noticed is that there is a price differentiation
in the way that they’re offered. The ones that are more desirable
are

more

expensive.

And

in

our

particular

research,

hydrocodonenoprescription.com was being offered for almost
$10,000 because that engine has been coded in such a way that
it knows what somebody is looking for. Somebody wants to buy
a domain name that says to the consumer, “You can get
Hydrocodone here with no prescription. And because we know
you want that, it’s going to cost you.” This is the kind of area that
we should be addressing as well.

Page 19 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Just out of curiosity, Garth, couldn’t you go to another domain,
another registrar, not ask for suggestions and just put that name
in and get it for $10?

GARTH BRUEN:

Maybe. But it might be just as expensive there, and in some
cases these were domain names that were already held.

YOAV KEREN:

Yoav Keren from BrandShield. I want to react actually to points
that you’ve raised. So I’ve been wearing two different hats
regionally. Most people know me from the registrar constituency
and I’ve been GNSO Counselor for the registrars until last year.
Today I’m part of the IPC. This is our other company, the brand
protection company.
And actually the two points you’ve raised are a little
problematic. One, as much as I know ICANN – although I’ve been
around this for 16 years in this organization – so I don’t see the
compliance going out of the organization. I think if we want to
do anything, we need just to ask for more. I can tell you that
we’re not happy of how these things are working, by the way
from both sides. I know registrars have problems which are legit
and also from brand protection perspective. There’s a lot of

Page 20 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

issues. So definitely there’s a need for pushing ICANN and
making it better. I don’t see anyone in ICANN taking it outside of
the organization.
But on the other issue of the suggestions, I think legally and
technically it’s just impossible to stop that. The fact that you
have a trademark registered somewhere is not known to the
registrar. These things are automatic. There’s just algorithms
that suggest something. There’s hundreds of thousands of
trademarks registered around the world, may be millions. It’s
impossible to control that. So the registrar cannot know whether
that is allowed or not. And more than that, the fact that you have
a trademark in my home country Israel doesn’t mean that it’s
protected in the U.S. So I might be able to register that domain
name and operate from the U.S. and be totally legal.
So I don’t think that’s a solution that you can really go after.
Thanks.

GARTH BRUEN:

Thank you. I have to disagree with you on a technical point. I
have observed intelligence built into these suggestion engines.
As an example, if I were to look for a domain name that
contained Viagra, it would suggest to me domain names that
contain Cialis. It knows well enough to alternate similar product
names. If I put in HBO, it’s going to offer me Cinemax. I know I’m

Page 21 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

very old and that’s a very old reference, but many people will get
it in this room. And just because ICANN would resist the idea that
compliance be moved outside the organization doesn’t mean
that we shouldn’t look for it.

GREG SHATAN:

Just a couple of thoughts, and then I’ll go to Paul and then Lori.
I’ve definitely seen behavior that seems to be linked either to
reverse engineered versions of the TMCH that have been used as
the database in order to jack up domain name prices clearly. So
that’s an issue. Also note, Hydrocodone is not a trademark, it’s a
generic name for the drug so that’s not strictly speaking a
trademark but it is still an example of how pricing is based on
kind of in some ways on popularity of searches, but with no
morality attached to it. So that’s an issue.
In terms of compliance, I see compliance constantly evolving
with the institution. In many ways it’s better than it was. In some
ways, but there’s still room to grow. Maybe ICANN needs more of
an Inspector General. Maybe it needs to be much more off to the
side. Maybe not separate from the organization but kind of just
like we have PTI being separated from ICANN but completely
independent but given space and room. Maybe we need
something, a model like that ultimately that takes it, that’s more
independent because ICANN is traditionally conflicted as to

Page 22 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

whether it’s in the business of supporting the sale of domain
names or regulating the industry in a sense. I know it’s not a
regulator but there’s obviously a lot of stuff going on that once
you look past it is self-regulation because self-regulation is the
barrier to greater regulation by states. And that’s generally
speaking one of the reasons why we do what we do here.
So in terms of thinking about where compliance could go, just
like we made some more extreme suggestions in the CWG but
ended up with something less extreme but accomplishing the
idea of a level of independence, maybe we end up in the same
way with a compliance function that cares less about whether
the volume of domain name sales stays high. So I’ll stop talking.
I’ve got Paul, I’ve got Lori, I’ve got Alan. And back to Garth.

PAUL MCGRADY:

So essentially, we all know ICANN has a policy function. It has a
commercial function and I won’t use the M word, but I’ll just say
it is the only entity from which you can sign a contract to
become a registry, or be accredited to become a registrar. So I
mean there’s a clear commercial function and that’s what we’re
talking about in terms of its economic interest being baked into
the model. There’s an IANA function. And then there’s a
compliance function. It’s the only organization I know of its size
that does not have a 360 compliance department that looks not

Page 23 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

only externally at its contracts but internally at itself, which is a
huge question mark that’s a separate issue maybe.
But in a world where digital archery lived for a few months, I
don’t think that Garth’s suggestion about looking about where
that compliance function should sit is all that space age, right?
We’ve seen far more unique things in this model than taking a
look at where the compliance function should sit.
So again, like the on-ramp that Steve and Holly were talking
about, about making sure that we’re including legacy TLDs in
this, I just want us to capture that idea because I think that it’s
an important idea and I’d like for us to walk away with it today
and really give it some thought. Thank you.

LORI SCHULMAN:

I want to echo what Paul said. I think this idea of an independent
compliance function is actually really interesting and I think it
would be worth talking about. I have a lot of random thoughts
because there’s a lot of things that have been said in the room.
But with regard to the suggestions, there’s a industry term for it
– name spinning. And name spinning is something that
trademark owners have really trying to be fighting within ICANN
and when we have raised it with ICANN Compliance the
response that we get – I’m not saying it’s an illegitimate
response, I think in many ways it is legitimate, there is no precise

Page 24 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

language in any of the agreements that say you can’t name spin.
Right? So it is kind of hard if you’re going to look to the four
corners of a document and it’s not there, what do you do?
And so then some people suggest well then you go ahead and
you look at the Public Interest Commitments. But then we were
just in a meeting two meetings before where there’s differences
of interpretation of the PICs, right? So to me the ideas – and I
and Alan Grogan will attest to this, he and I have been in some
intense conversations over the last year or so about this – and
one of the things that I have suggested and I don’t see waiting is,
if we have these issues about interpretation, why do we need to
wait for a next round? Why do we need to wait for anything? Why
can’t we get together as communities – and I think ALAC and IPC
would be a great place to start some of this – is that if there are
known ambiguities in current agreements then it’s up to the
community to clarify them and then work within the process to
amend the contracts the way they amended.
Will it be easy? No. Will it be pushed back from registrars and
registries? Yes. But that’s the process. And so what I just find in
this world, particularly now that I’m advocating for brand
owners in my current function, is why we wait. When we know
the problems exist today, we have interested parties – like on
the name spinning side, I have privately talked to registrars who
are very sensitive to the issues of consumer protection and how

Page 25 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

do we prevent confusion and still have a viable business,
because name spinning is arguably legitimate marketing. “Okay,
if this doesn’t work, try this.” I mean, you go into a shoe store,
one pair of shoes doesn’t fit, they’re going to offer you another
pair of shoes. It is that simple and that is how registrars look at
it.
On the other hand, because of the context issue, the name issue,
the trademark issue, that falls into this, it’s not that simple. And I
have had registrars suggest to me that there could be voluntary
measures that registrars take their own lists, their own sort of
trademark clearinghouses, for lack of a better word, where there
could be agreements, particularly with the larger registrars to
put some of these in place.
I think it’s really important and I think Alex may have even
coined a term, I don’t remember, but somebody – oh, no it
wasn’t, it was someone else, Alex . But the idea is this –
compliance is the stick – what we want to beat people up with
more or less. Voluntary practices is the carrot, right? If you act a
certain way and you’re a good community member, then you
don’t have to worry about compliance because you’re in a safe
harbor. You’ve done something that is constructive and helpful
to the community.

Page 26 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

So I think it’s really important when we talk about these issues
of compliance that we talk about carrots as well as sticks, that
we talk about this mesh between what can we get registrars on
board with so they’re not confronted with the heavier burden of
a contract compliance issue.

ALAN GREENBERG:

a couple of thoughts, and I’ll prefix it with I am not a lawyer,
which is an unusual thing for many people in this room to be
able to say. But I did earn my lawyer merit badge a long time
ago, so I have just a little bit of idea.
The concept of Compliance moving outside of ICANN, I don’t
think is possible at all because Compliance is in the job of
enforcing contracts that ICANN has signed. The concept of
outsourcing somehow the investigation end, report end, and the
place where you report problems to and the investigation, is
something that’s exceedingly viable. But regardless of whether
it’s inside or not, I think a large part of it comes down to
reporting in such clear ways and so transparently that you can
demonstrate that you are indeed doing a good job, and take
really seriously when there are examples of not.
So even without moving that part out of ICANN – which would
not be a bad idea – I think that has a lot of merit – there can be
things done depending on how seriously you take the problem.

Page 27 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

I’m not sure you want to compare it to digital archery. Well, no,
some of you may or may not know, that name was coined to
make fun of it. It was then adopted as the name, which shows
the attitude of the people it was coined as a joke to make fun of
a really stupid idea and it was then adopted as the name of the
stupid idea which was then pushed. So I’m not sure we want to
take something that we like and relate it to digital archery.

PAUL MCGRADY:

My only point is that with this crowd, a seven horned, purple,
polka dotted, whatever could walk in here and it wouldn’t faze
us. That’s all. That’s all I’m saying.

ALAN GREENBERG:

It wouldn’t faze us, but we’d line up for rides.

GREG SHATAN:

We got Garth, a remote question, then Yoav.

GARTH BRUEN:

Thank you. I just wanted to tell everybody that the sort of origin
of suggesting that Compliance be moved outside of ICANN
actually comes from Compliance itself, from their own words.
Because at various times when issues have been reported to
Compliance, the response has often been, “We are not experts in

Page 28 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

X.” It’s like, we have this problem with online pharmacies that
are illegal – “We are not experts in online pharmacies. Go
somewhere else.” And you could just replace that with whatever
illicit or illegal activity is going on. The UDRP is the best example.
Let’s go way outside the organization and have this independent
arbiter decide who’s right and who’s wrong, and then come back
to us.
So the point at which you keep reporting things to an entity and
they keep saying, “We’re not experts. We can’t deal with this.” At
what point does that function become completely useless if
they’re not experts? Then put it somewhere else and build it with
experts.

[SCHEIN]:

[inaudible][Schein], ICANN staff. We have a remote question let
me read out now. “I’d be interested in reading the results of
Garth’s research referenced earlier in this session. Is a link
available?” Okay, we just learned that there’s a link available.

GREG SHATAN:

Page 29 of 45

Thanks. Yoav?

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

YOAV KEREN:

EN

I don’t want it to be misunderstood, I think it’s a great idea to
have it outside of ICANN. I just think it’s going to be very hard to
get there, or maybe impossible. And I don’t want us to fight the
wrong war and the wrong battle. And I think that the best way
forward would be first to maybe outline what are the
requirements, the things that we would want Compliance to do
better, or to do at all? And what are our problems?
One of the offers could be, the option to resolve that is an
outsider entity, maybe that’s actually probably more possible to
do part of those things. And that would be something more
practical forward. I think if we go now to the ICANN Board and
say, “Okay, our demand is take out Compliance of ICANN,” I
think that’s going to be a very hard battle to fight and we should
start from more practical ideas.

GREG SHATAN:

Holly in one second, but harking back to the CWG we talked
about the issues of functional versus structural independence
for PTI, and I think a greater degree of functional independence
for compliance would be all to the good because it’s not – unlike
typical compliance functions – it’s not defending the interests
merely of the party to the contract which is ICANN, or should not
be, but rather the interests of all stakeholders for which it stands
as a proxy. Holly?

Page 30 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

HOLLY RAICHE:

EN

I like all the ideas, and I’m just thinking we could always do a
good cop/bad cop, we want Compliance completely outsourced.
However, the middle road is, and it would be functional
independence, it would be moving the function out to the edge.
It would also be the 360 review that doesn’t do and should do.
I’m just thinking in terms of how do you actually structure where
we want to go with this? And then getting everybody’s ideas
together and saying, “This is what we want and this is why.” And
maybe picking up some of Vanda’s point, but start with .com.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks, Holly, and I think that also focuses on the idea that we
should avoid this meeting becoming just a talk shop and
actually have an action items/next steps. Not only will that –

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Greg, [inaudible].

GREG SHATAN:

Too late. Ted Cruz can run for President. This Canadian can, too.
Now you made me lose my train of thought.
But when we come up with action items, not only will that help
in the short run have something come out of this but in the long

Page 31 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

run, it will rekindle the fruitful coordination of IPC and ALAC
where we sit and it’s clearly non-contracted parties and for
many of us – some of us are also contracted, but not me – but in
any case, I think there is a lot that can be said for that we sit
closer than we sit.
And I think ultimately, working on things where we do have a lot
in common can also help bridge gaps or bring closer some gaps
on things where we find ourselves more kind of diametrically
opposed. But in the end, in a consensus driven system, you can’t
be diametrically opposed in the result. You can be maybe
initially but you never can be at the end. So the closer we can get
on things we can get close on, the closer we can also get on
things where we’re not so close. And maybe I’m just a fuzzythinking one worlder, but I think that can help us. So we’ll need
to pivot relatively soon as we get through this to come to some
action items and maybe some volunteers to move things
forward.
I’ve noted that in trying to serve the IPC as its President, one of
the things I have to avoid is also becoming a lead of everything
that we try to do, but rather to have others take specific items
forward. So that’s an invitation to others to do that. As if this is
worthwhile to talk about, it should be worthwhile to do, which is
what made it worthwhile to talk about in the first place. So some

Page 32 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

thoughts, and I’ll stop talking now. Anybody else want to start?
Steve?

STEVE METALITZ:

Well, let’s talk about a couple of action items that are potential.
First of all, again, I think it’s great that we are having this
meeting and I think we should pledge to have a similar meeting
at the next ICANN meeting if we can, even if we’re back in the old
silos schedule. Let’s try to do that.
If we identify one or two issues that we’ve talked about here,
none of these are issues that can be moved really quickly. But
maybe if we have people who are interested in pursuing them
we could get a small group of volunteers together to work online
to come up with more of an action plan that could then be
brought back to both groups, something realistic and on a
timeframe and so forth.
The two I’ve heard here repeatedly, and [obviously] there have
been others, too – one is finding what’s the best way of getting a
more independent compliance function within ICANN and
whether that’s structural or functional, I just think it needs more
thought than certainly I’ve given it. There is also some history
here, because as many of you recall a few years ago there was a
brief and intense period of interest in the GAC in this question
and the necessity of taking the compliance function out from

Page 33 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

under what is now the Global Domains Division and making it
report directly to the CEO. That I believe happened and then we
just saw recently an announcement that the compliance
function would continue to report to the GDD. So I don’t know
quite where that stands, but that’s one issue. What would be a
proposal and a strategy for gaining more independence for the
ICANN compliance function?
A second one is, what’s a proposal and a strategy for trying to
bring some greater safeguards into the legacy gTLD. How do we
approach the legacy gTLD issues? Obviously, we have the
Registrar Accreditation Agreement. That’s one tool that applies
to registrations in .com, .net, .org, etc. But the equivalent like
what’s in the Base Registry Agreement with the Public Interest
Commitments does not exist for the legacy gTLDs.
So that might be another – those agreements come up for
renewal periodically and we could think about a strategy for
trying to highlight those issues and seeing what would be
realistic to try to get into those agreements or at least to
encourage maybe with carrots rather than the stick of what’s in
the agreement, are there ways to encourage those registry
operators to do more.
So those would be my suggestions for two topics, and if there is
sufficient interest in either or both, maybe we could get small

Page 34 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

groups working on those with representation from both sides
and see if we could come up with a reasonable plan. I’m sure
we’re not going to come up with a reasonable plan in the next
15-20 minutes, but maybe we could get that process in place.
Thanks.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks, Steve. Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. The two topics that Steve raised were the same ones
I had written down with slightly different words. And the
uniformity of contracts I think I would like to have a briefing to
start with from ICANN staff, the registries, some combination, on
what the impediments are to doing that and what might be
done to make sure. Now, as I said, part of it is going to be under
review on the protections mechanisms and that’s a couple of
years out. But protection mechanisms are not the only
differences. So I think that’s worth investigating and at least
asking a question for, if nothing else, a public or private briefing
at the next meeting. So I think that’s a good start.
On the issue of compliance, I don’t recall actually the GAC
getting involved. I do recall, however, a WHOIS AoC
recommendation that said it should report directly to a Board

Page 35 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

committee. The Board chose to say it will report to the CEO, and
now we have at least an interim change away from that and I
have actually talked to the CEO several times on that one issue
because I thought it was somewhat perturbing. He viewed it as
simply a short-term expedient when he is heavily involved with
the transition and doesn’t know much about our compliance.
And Compliance did when Akram was an interim CEO did report
to him. But he felt that this was expedient and made sense. My
response was, “It may be expedient and it may make sense, the
optics of it are horrible. And we’ll see if and when that changes.”
I don’t think our object is the independence of Compliance or
even the independence of the compliance investigation
function, which is I think the only part you could physically move
outside because of the ultimate aim is to enforce contracts and
those are ICANN contracts. I think the ultimate aim is a good
compliance function. And if it works really well, I don’t think
many of us could care where it is if it works really well.
So I would think the first thing that we want to do on that one is,
what kind of reporting do we want to see from Compliance to
convince us and satisfy us that it is doing a good job? And I
suspect that we could specify the kinds of statistics, and perhaps
more than just statistics, that will give us a warmer feeling.

Page 36 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

The last time I looked at the output, it wasn’t enough to really
convince me that things were going well. It was better than it
had been a year before, but I would like to see an independent
audit of it, for instance. I would like to see statistics that could
really demonstrate that we have a compliance operation that is
reacting to the things that we want them to react to.
Now, for all I know, that’s happening today. I can’t tell because I
haven’t personally submitted any requests recently. But I think
we need a much higher… We talk a lot in ICANN about trust. And
maybe this whole accountability thing wouldn’t have come up if
we trusted the Board. I think we need a higher level of trust and
belief that things are going well. And whether that comes from
externalizing something or simply making it work well or simply
proving to us that it is working well today, I think we need a
much higher level of trust in the ultimate end product.
Thank you.

GREG SHATAN:

We’ve got Steve and then Yoav.

STEVE METALITZ:

Just briefly, as usual Alan has really helped to crystallize some of
these things and put them in a clear context. And I think the
suggestion about getting a briefing on the impediments to

Page 37 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

uniformity of contracts is a good one. I’m not quite sure who is
best situated to do that, but let’s think about that.
I said independence and we had this discussion of functional
versus structural, it doesn’t necessarily have to be outside of
ICANN. So I guess what I was talking about was shorthand and
the lens you’re looking at it through is the reporting of what
they’re doing. I support what you’re saying. I think we have to be
thinking about not the quantity of reporting because, boy, do
they report a lot. They generate a huge amount of reports. But
there’s a quality question.
And I’ll just give one example. It actually came up in the meeting
that we had that Bruce Tonkin convened yesterday, and that
was this question of contracted parties that repeatedly get
called on something and then fix it within the five-day or sevenday period, so in the statistics it shows up as a great victory for
Compliance is really working. But if this is happening repeatedly,
especially in the environment that we’re talking about here,
sometimes just a few days is enough to inflict a lot of damage.
So yes, it’s certainly worth having more discussion about ways
to get more meaningful reporting. But my suggestion really on
the independence was, again, maybe there’s some experts that
we can talk to about how this is done in other organizations.
Again, there’s no organization quite like ICANN but there are

Page 38 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

some similarities. And we’ve heard some suggestions about
ways – an audit is a good idea, too. An Inspector General
structure is a possibility. So maybe we just need to find some
people who have greater expertise in this certainly than I do and
perhaps than many of the rest of us do to give us some
suggestions about ways. Because I think independence itself is
an important factor. I agree with you, we want a good
compliance function, but the chances of that are probably
reduced so long as to the degree than Compliance is tied in with
the behaviors of the companies who write the checks that make
ICANN function.
So I just think it’s kind of hard to… There is an independence
issue that I think is pretty much bound up with quality of
compliance activities.

YOAV KEREN:

Yes, I think reporting is important but there is more on the
ongoing operations, and that would be probably more the sense
of transparency on what they do. And maybe more with the
communication with people that come from the IPC and others.
I’ll give an example. WHOIS inaccuracy reporting, for example. I
know it from both sides and I know how much they go after the
registrar to give them evidence, which is a good thing.
Sometimes they’re overdoing it. Like they get evidence and they

Page 39 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

just don’t understand that not everywhere is like in the U.S.
There’s places in the world that the address works in different
ways. But I’ve explained that in different discussions that we had
different places.
But the other thing that we’ve had experiences is that we had a
few cases where we reported WHOIS inaccuracy and we knew
for sure these were counterfeit websites that had to be taken
down. It was clear these are bogus names. And we get an
answer, “It was confirmed by the registrar.” That’s it. “Okay, can
we see the…okay…what’s…how?” There’s no way. “Okay, can
we see that?” Nothing. No reply.
So this is one of those things where it would probably be more
helpful, okay maybe they did a mistake or maybe they’re just not
going after those registrars that are not the good players as they
should and they’re just leaving them up. I don’t know. And this is
exactly where… But this is an ongoing thing. The reporting here
has nothing to do with it. This is to really show that they’re doing
their job.

ALAN GREENBERG:

My last real interaction with Compliance was now a year and a
half ago or so, but it was a domain that Garth had tried to have
taken down and it was rejected saying, “No problem there.” The
WHOIS information pointed to a bakery in a small town in France

Page 40 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

using a French postal code which could not exist based on the
structure of French postal codes, and an e-mail address using a
domain which didn’t exist. So there was no way that mail was
going to get through. And to Compliance’s credit, when I put it
under my name as a single submission and gave them fair
warning it was coming – actually, I didn’t give them warning it
was coming – they responded pretty quickly saying the registrar
has taken the domain down. And I checked and it was. A week
later, it was back. And of course Compliance only checked when
they got the response. They now go back and check again later
on to see if it stays down. At least I’m told they do. But clearly,
reporting there was not going to solve the problem because in
both cases, the reporting looked okay.
When I say reporting, I’m not trying to prescribe what the form
is, I’m just saying there are ways of being more transparent and
open than we are and we certainly have been in the past. And
even if we externalize all of the compliance functions, even if we
figure out how to do the contractual part, it’s still going to be
funded by ICANN and ICANN has control by how much money
they’ve put into it. So there’s always going to be a linkage.
What we really want is good trusted Compliance. And I’m not
proposing the way, I always have a very strong suspicion of
simple answers because there are often second and third order

Page 41 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

effects that we never predict ahead of time that come and get
us.
So I’m not looking for a simple buzzword answer. I’m looking for
something that can and will be trusted. You may not like it if it
works against you, but we can demonstrate it’s trusted.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks, Alan. Only about 15 minutes left. I think both Steve and
Alan have, as I said, kind of identified the same points that we’ve
discussed and what we need to do is kind of set up maybe an email list or some small groups from the people from each side to
be on those two lists to take things forward and report back to
respective organizations and then, while Hyderabad seems like
a long ways away, it’s not that far off so it’ll give us some time to
work. Cheryl?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thanks. I like what I’ve heard and I think this is great that we’re
starting to get some way forwards and looking at declared
mutualism where it can exist and benefit from working smarter
not harder. And it’s on that working smarter not harder that I
just wanted to make another suggestion. And that is, we’re
talking about having some very important briefings as well as
some very important dialogs with key parts of ICANN and ICANN

Page 42 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

staff. Can we make it that we do this as a group activity instead
of them having to go to three different rooms to talk to several of
us? It seems that there’s a certain cross interest here. There may
even be wider cross community interest, but let’s see if we can
say, “Come and talk to all of us,” and others may even join. It
won’t be just a good use of everyone’s time, especially if we
don’t have a B Meeting design at the time. I’d just like you to
consider that as you move forward.

GREG SHATAN:

That’s a good idea and a good way to kind of get us out of the
silos but at the same time not go all the way to the more one
way, broad update meetings where the interests of those in the
audience are so 360 that you can’t actually focus on anything. So
I think that a meeting where we kind of focus a little bit more
would be really good.

ALAN GREENBERG:

I’m afraid I’m going to have to run in a minute even though it’s
not quite the end of the session. So I’d like to take the
opportunity of saying thank you to Greg for initiating this
because it was his idea. Thank you to the ALAC for when I
presented the idea to them, I have rarely gotten so quick a
response and universal saying yes. So I think it’s interesting that
the only agenda items we’ve covered are Welcomes,

Page 43 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

EN

Introductions, and Next Steps, and the actual subject matter we
ignored completely and had a good conversation. There’s
probably a message there. I’m not going to try to interpret it.
Maybe we don’t need to have a subject next time, although my
staff insists that we have agenda items and subjects. But thank
you all. You can certainly continue for the next 10 minutes. I’m
afraid I have to run.

GREG SHATAN:

Thank you. I probably think we would all enjoy a little time so we
don’t all have to run to the next place that we’re going, since we
managed to schedule a zero space in between. And I think we’ve
covered some good topics and we wouldn’t do justice to any
further ones in the time we have remaining.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Is there [inaudible] to be in the mailing list?

GREG SHATAN:

Sure. We could do that or we could just go out to our respective
mailing lists for the mailing lists. And then bring together some
mailing lists, a meta mailing list. I never met a mailing list I didn’t
like.
This meeting is adjourned.

Page 44 of 45

HELSINKI – ALAC and IPC Meeting

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 45 of 45

EN

