HELSINKI – Review point for Communique Input

EN

HELSINKI – Review point for Communique Input
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 10:45 to 11:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Please take your seats. Thank you. We have to continue.

OLOF NORDLING:

We're about to reconvene and I count in Finnish now and see
how far I get.
(counting in Finnish.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

You need to count back not up; otherwise, they won't get in.

OLOF NORDLING:

Okay. We start with (counting in Finnish).

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. This is the time -[ Applause ]
Tom is going to make a few announcements that are important
for to you understand before we begin the next session.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Review point for Communique Input

EN

Tom, please go ahead.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Thomas. Welcome back, GAC.
A couple of things, and then a quick update on the status of the
communique. A couple of things firstly to do with some admin
matters. Please remember, as you were asked yesterday, that if
you wish to be photographed for the new GAC website, that the
photographer is available downstairs for this morning and this
afternoon. So please take advantage of that if you wish to do so.
It is not compulsory to have your photo taken, but you may wish
to be -- to have your physical merits duly recognized on the new
GAC website.
Secondly, please remember to drop your business cards in the
colorful gift bag at the door, please -- if you're a GAC member,
that is -- so that we can, a) include you in the door prize draw
and, b) ensure that we have a very complete record of who is
here.
And finally, with regard to the communique input point that is
on your agenda, all I have to note there is that we have received
input and some new text on some issues which I will incorporate
in a revised draft and circulate later today to the GAC. The new

Page 2 of 3

HELSINKI – Review point for Communique Input

EN

material concerns IGO protections. That will be made available
to you shortly.
There has been feedback on a number of other areas of draft
advice to the Board, and we should have that available very
shortly.
I think that covers matter for now.
Thank you, Thomas.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 3 of 3

