EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 13:30 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Hello everybody. Thank you for being here in time. We will
immediately start. We have another nice and interesting and
hopefully interactive session ahead of us.

It's a 90-minute

session. It's the longest, I think, that we have at all, because the
issues are not that unimportant that we are going to talk about,
and I'm very happy to have a number of extremely competent
people around me, so that I can actually lay back and listen to
how this goes.
In particular, I would like to thank Tom and Jorge, who
organized this, and to our colleagues from the GNSO, the chairs
of the working group on subsequent procedures.
So I start by handing over the floor to Jorge from Switzerland.
Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Hello. Good afternoon.
Thank you for giving me the floor and giving me this outstanding
task of leading this session. Thank you very much. It's very

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

much appreciated. Especially after having lunch in such a short
time frame.
So we hope that nevertheless, colleagues will engage in good
dialogue.
We have the benefit and also the pleasure of having here with us
two of the co-chairs of the PDP on subsequent procedures on
new gTLDs.
Did I say that more or less correctly?
We -- it's Jeff Neuman and Avri Doria. And the third co-chair
apologizes because he had other commitments. So we will have
the benefit of talking to them to engage in a dialogue with them.
And I think that first, as an overview of how we intend to
structure the session, in your package, in your information
package, you have a general brief about this topic, so we will
first go through that brief. Tom Dale, who wrote that brief, will
take that over. That's the first part of this.
Then we will engage in a direct dialogue with Jeff and Avri, and
we will focus especially on a certain set of so-called overarching
issues related to the expansion -- to future expansions of the
gTLD space, and you may be aware, but it also may be still in
your email folders that Tom sent you a draft -- a possible draft

Page 2 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

response to these overarching questions sent to us by the PDP
working group.
This was circulated on June 22nd, but we still have time until I
think July 24th to send an answer to the working group.
Nevertheless, this physical face-to-face meeting is a very good
opportunity to go through the elements of this draft response
and to try to come up with some common ground in order to
speed up the process and also to make our input as quickly as
possible and also being mindful that many of us will hopefully
be on vacation during July for some weeks or for some time, so
it's good to get this starting.
And finally, we would also like to remind colleagues that this
afternoon in this very same room we will have a crosscommunity session on this very topic, so it's a very good
opportunity for us now to prepare for that cross-community
session.
There are already colleagues who will make inputs or will be
available for the cross-community session this afternoon
starting at 17:00, if I'm not mistaken.
Among other topics which will be covered, will be dealt with,
there are community-based applications, where we have Mark
Carvell from the United Kingdom making -- intending to make a

Page 3 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

contribution. We also will be talking about safeguards and
public interest commitments, and there we have our topic leads
from the E.U. commission and I guess also from the United
States.
We have the topic of underserved regions related to applications
on new gTLDs, and there we will have also Alice Munyua.
And finally, we also have the questions, of course, related to geo
names as TLDs where we will benefit with a presence -- from the
presence of Olga Cavalli.
So there will be more or less the structure. Of course as a final
point to this, we will have to talk about how we organize our
interaction with the PDP working group. For the time being,
there's little participation from GAC people there, and at least I
am personally of the view that if we want to have a good policy -policy development process, we need active participation from
GAC members in this very important PDP.
And with this, if you are ready, Tom, I would very kindly ask you
to go through the brief.

TOM DALE:

Page 4 of 54

Thank you, Jorge, and good afternoon.

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

And to pick up on that final point that Jorge made, a number of
GAC members, including Jorge, and indeed including myself and
Tracey, have been participating in the subsequent procedures
PDP working group for some time now, but as Jorge indicated,
more GAC participation is always welcome. That is not a formal
nomination process. It's entirely up to you to register and
participate as and when you see fit, but I would strongly
encourage you to do so as well, and to assist in reporting back to
the GAC.
You may be aware that you -- well, I know you get a lot of emails
from me, so -- and that doesn't always make me popular, but
among the many emails that you get from me are reports, when
I can get them together, on meetings of this particular PDP
working group. I hope they've been helpful, and I'd stress that
we have here not just the GAC -- some of the GAC participants in
that working group but also two of the co-chairs, and it's a very
good opportunity for you to get more information if you wish.
Now, to go through the briefing that we prepared a couple of
weeks ago now -- and as always, some things have moved on -but running through the brief, which is on the screen and which
was in the main briefing pack that Tracey sent to the GAC a
couple of weeks ago, there were four things that we tried to
cover there.

Page 5 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

The first was the broad ICANN policy context, not just for this
working group and PDP but for new gTLD policy development
generally.
The second is a range of current work that's occurring, some of
which you've heard about already this week.
The third was another attempt at categorizing the public-policy
aspects of this work, and finally some suggested next steps. So
very quickly going through those.
The first points concerning the ICANN policy context were that
the -- the term "future rounds" is used, but in fact it's important
to bear in mind that there is no -- there is no assumption or
guarantee, if you think that's the right term, that there will be
future rounds.

There may or may not be future gTLD

applications, but whether they're conducted in the sort of
formal time frame of a round as per the most recent one is
something else that is up for discussion, analysis, consideration
and advice within this working group.
We noted that, in the briefing, some economic analysis on the
very basic question of whether there should be new gTLDs at all
was done some years ago, back in 2010, and it's not clear
whether the more fundamental questions there are, in fact,
being addressed at the moment in any of the many processes,
but we might come back to that.

Page 6 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

We're making the point, and it's quite important in dealing with
particularly PDP working groups and others, that this is not an
exercise that's somehow centrally controlled by ICANN, the
ICANN Board or staff or anyone else. There are structures and
processes for policy development process, particularly in the
GNSO, but it is by definition a bottom-up, multistakeholder
process, and it can be very unpredictable in the way of
democratic processes generally, as I guess was seen in some
countries recently. But that's how it goes.
The work for existing -- The time frame issue, finally, which a lot
of people ask about -- that is, when. If there is going to be
another round or another process, when will that happen. Well,
that's not in any one person's sort of hands either. There were
some comments that we provided there that ICANN made
recently at a function in Geneva, but 2018, 2019 seems to be the
absolute earliest that many commentators think is even feasible
let alone desirable for the release of gTLDs. But as I say, no one
person is in control of that at the moment. There are a lot of
processes going on.
So to scroll down a little bit further, you've heard already this
week about a number of review processes that are occurring
that are very relevant to future gTLD policy development.

Page 7 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

We had a discussion and a briefing yesterday on the
competition, consumer trust and consumer choice review. The
GNSO working group, a PDP Working Group on Subsequent
Procedures, the one whose co-chairs are with us this afternoon,
is obviously a major source of discussion, advice, and analysis in
this area, but so is the work going on for policy development on
rights protection mechanisms in gTLDs and possibly some
others as well.
Finally, just scrolling down to the table that we have there, this is
a document that you had put before you as the GAC in
Marrakech, prepared by us. It was an attempt by us to try to
provide a general set of categories for considering public-policy
aspects of new gTLD procedural and policy issues, all of which
are under consideration by various working groups, particularly
the one that's with us today. And going down to the very final
section headed "Possible Next Steps for the GAC," we had
suggested, to start discussion, a couple of things. Firstly, to
review the level of GAC member participation in these working
groups; particularly, the subsequent procedures one, and Jorge
has spoken about that. Secondly, to note that reports are
coming in from other groups, such as the one we received
yesterday from the chair of the CCT review team. Thirdly, to
consider a response to questions that have arrived now from -from the subsequent procedures working group. And finally, to

Page 8 of 54

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

consider using that public-policy table that we drafted as some
sort of collaborative GAC work space, and perhaps have a little
bit of guidance on -- from that on organizing and clarifying some
of the GAC inputs before they go out from the GAC.
Those were the suggestions made in the brief. As Jorge has said,
a draft response to the request for initial input from the working
group is -- is also something we would like to touch on, but at
the moment, those are the broad areas that we tried to cover in
the lead up to this session.
Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Thank you very much for this very quick overview.
Are there any questions, any comments on the brief at this
general level?
Anybody? No?
But you are there; right?
Okay. Then I think that we should go to the co-chairs of the PDP
Working Group. And perhaps to break the ice, we could ask you
to very briefly set the stage on where we are, without a
presentation, just orally, very shortly.

Page 9 of 54

And then after that,

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

perhaps we could start talking about the overarching questions.
Is that okay with you?

JEFF NEUMAN:

Good afternoon. I'm Jeff Neuman. I'm one of the co-chairs of
the working group. Avri Doria is also here, is also one of the cochairs, and then there's a third co-chair, Steve Coates, who is
actually on the Nominating Committee so he's in separate
meetings. He is in Helsinki although I haven't actually seen him
or anybody from the Nominating Committee. I assume they're
here.
Thank you for having us in today, and, you know, we'll start with
a little brief description of the work we're doing. And I'm happy
to take questions.
As I said to some of the people at the table here, I may say some
things that are controversial just because I want to get some
discussion going. That doesn't necessarily mean I believe what
I'm saying, but, really, just to get everyone talking. And, you
know, it's very important, especially at this Meeting B, to have -to be interactive and to get out our thoughts and comments.
So one of the questions I'm asked all the time is, you know, why
are you doing this? Are you rushing in to have new gTLDs? You

Page 10 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

know, what's the rush? Why don't we wait until all the reviews
are done before you start your work?
And I just want to bring us back initially to the policy in 2007,
which was bottom-up policy from the GNSO that was eventually
approved by the Board which said that there shall be -- there
shall be a mechanism for the introduction of new gTLDs in a
orderly, predictable manner.
The policy was never that there be one round and never future
gTLDs.
So based on that initial policy, which is unless and until
overturned, that's what guides the GNSO in our work. So -- But
as you'll see and as Avri will explain, there is a question that's
out to the community now about whether this should be the
policy -- this should continue to be the policy going forward.
So with that, I'm going to turn it over to Avri to talk about some
of the other questions that's out for public comment now.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. Avri Doria speaking. One of the differences between
Jeff and I is I also say things that are controversial, but generally,
I believe them. So it's one of the problems that I often have.

Page 11 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

One of the things that the policy in 2007 also said is that there
would be a review. And, indeed, we are doing that review as
part of the policy development process.
There are many other reviews going on at the same time. We're
trying to coordinate with all of those and work sort of in parallel
with them. But, indeed, part of what we're doing in the policy
development process is also a review.
And as is customary in policy development processes, we start
out by sending out to the community organizations, the SOs, the
ACs, the stakeholder groups, the constituencies, a set of
questions that are basically the initial point from which we start
having the discussions.
Now, normally we do just one for the whole policy development
process, but in this case, it's a complicated enough one that
we've done a first one, and there will be at least one more.
In this first, one, we're basically approaching a set of six plus one
overarching subjects that we're looking for views on.

For

example, the first question -- And this is in the form of a
questionnaire, and hopefully we will be able to get answers.
They won't need to be very well developed answers. They don't
have to be long answers. They can be short answers. One-word
answers will probably be fine in some cases.

Page 12 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

Additional gTLDs in the future. Should there, in fact, be new
gTLDs? Should there be subsequent procedures? And if not,
what are the justifications for and ramifications of discontinuing
the program?
Now, we've told people that there will be other rounds. Now,
we're pretty much not using the word "round" in our discussion
because one of the questions we're going to ask is should they
be done in rounds. And until we've gotten to the point of
deciding that rounds is the way to go -- and, yes, there's an
assumption that we will use some sort of windowing procedure
for blocks of applications, but, really, until we've gotten the
feedback from the community on things like, yes, there should
be gTLDs in the future, and, yes, we should do them in rounds,
we're trying to avoid using that word.
Another question -- So that was two questions.
Another question is gTLD differentiation. In the last round, we
went with standard applications and then community. We did
not, in that case, go into differentiation of many different types
of gTLD. Partly, and this was an argument I used then also, is
that we were able to imagine many types at that point. The last
round has shown us what the types are.

Page 13 of 54

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

So the types has basically -- is perhaps something that has
emerged, knowledge that has emerged from that previous
round.
So when we're looking at the rounds, we see brands. We see
geographic names, we see communities.
And then we asked the question:

Is there just one size of

application that fits all? Is there one size round? Do they all
have to happen in the same round? How do we differentiate? Is
there a reason for differentiations?

And what sort of

differentiations do we think need to be made?
Predictability. One of the -- The first commandment of the
previous round was predictable. But then we started seeing that
the world changed. We got GAC comments. We saw other
events and things had to change. And so there's obviously a
need for flexibility and predictability. So how do we deal with
that balance. We're obviously not in a world where we can come
up with a program that is 100% predictable no matter what view
comes up. We know that there will be policy comments from
others. We hope to avoid many of them by having a lot of
participation in the meantime so there's not a lot of unknowns
coming later, but there's only so many unknowns you can avoid.
So we're really trying to find a balance. And we're asking again,
how do we work that? How do we deal with making something

Page 14 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

that's predictable for people that are applying, whether it's
communities or businesses, that want to be able to know how
much they're going to spend, how long it's going to take, what
kind of work they need to do to apply and deal with the fact that,
you know, there may be something unpredictable that happens,
that needs to happen to make the program fit all the
requirements that ICANN can throw at you.
Community engagement is how do we make sure that when we
come out of this we've got the community, first of all, dealing
with it and having been part of it. But also, once the program
starts and we start to the effects -- see the effects, how do we
deal with community engagement without it being a shock to
the system, without it being something that -- that throws the
application procedures into turmoil and confuses everyone. So
how do we do that?
We're asking questions about limiting. Do we limit the number
of applications? Let's say we are doing a round. Do we limit the
number? Is 100, 200, 1,000, 2,000. Do we limit the number of
applications that a single applicant can -- can apply for? And if
we decide on limitations, what sort of limitations? How do we
determine them? And how do we enforce them? How do we
make them make sense?

Page 15 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

So those are the kinds of questions. And then the last question
we're asking is, while we're going through this process of
developing the policy, how do we make sure that all of the
community organizations we're dealing with, all of the SOs, ACs,
stakeholder groups, constituencies, specifically in this case you
folks, the GAC, how do we make sure that you are being included
in the conversation and we've gotten the -- all the input from
you that we can get so that we have fewer surprises as we go
along later. So that's sort of a quick recap of the document, the
questionnaire that we've sent that we're calling community
comment one and that is due by the 25th of July. I was told that
the 24th was a Sunday, so we're actually calling it the 25th. I
checked. I immediately checked with staff to see. But thank
you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Great. Thank you so much. I think these are really exciting and
very important questions which go to the heart of any future
expansion of the new gTLD name space. So I think that the -- I
think the questions have been very well put down by Avri. We
could have already any comment, any first reaction. Kavouss,
please.

Page 16 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

IRAN:

EN

Thank you, Avri. Thank you, colleagues. I think I have a lot of
experience with respect to the question. First, the recipient of
question. Who received the question. Maybe not received by
the person that you wish to answer or it should be answered.
Maybe in the other hands of other people. This is one point.
But the second point is, questions should be very limited in
number and should have logic to be question. For instance, can
you guess how many gTLD we have to use? What is the basis to
say that use 3,000 total? Use 5,000. In first round was about
1,930. So what is the basis that we say that use this one? And
then, limit the number for applicants. What is the logic? Two.
Why not five? And why not ten? Then, applicant is vague. In the
country amid thousand of applicants then each issue 5, you
have 5,000. And another country maybe one applicant only. So
there should be a logic behind the questions.

And more

importantly should be sufficient time to answer the questions.
Once the questions are limited, are clear, and have logic behind
them, should have sufficient time. And above that we should
have a proper way how to analyze the answers. Sometimes they
may not be easy to answer the questions. Question may be very
-- answer may be very vague so that people, they guess. This is -might be the answer. No, it may not be. May be different. So
should be sufficient briefing or explanation of each questions.

Page 17 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

So I don't know whether the 25th of July, Sunday, Monday, or
any day is a day that really we should rely. We are dealing with
one of the most important things which many people, they have
missed in the first round. If you want to be done properly we
should do it properly. So let us be practical. I have been faced
with hundred of these questions elsewhere.

I don't know

sometimes what are the problems and difficulties. So let us be
really clear with ourselves. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Thank you, Kavouss. Any other comment? Do you want
to react to that?

JEFF NEUMAN:

Yeah. This is Jeff Neuman again. I think one thing I wanted to
point out is that we're asking for initial thoughts on these
questions. These are not final answers. We expect to come back
to a lot of these questions as we do our work. The goal is to get,
as Avri said, kind of a baseline. To make sure that people in the
working group and in the community actually believe there
should be additional new gTLDs. Obviously if the community
comes back and says unanimously, no, we don't think there
should be any new gTLDs, well then, I guess we could stop work
at that point. We don't need to go on to all of the other subjects.

Page 18 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

Once we establish this baseline, the group is then going to work
in five or six different tracks on very specific elements of the
process for applying for a new gTLD or objecting to applications
that are filed. There's a whole list of subjects, probably close to
100 or so individual subjects, that we will tackle once we have
some initial thoughts on these overarching questions. But then
we also believe that we'll be coming back to these questions
over and over again. For example, if we decide that yes, it is a
good idea to deal with different types of applications differently.
For example, we may want to come up with a category of brands
or a category of geographic. Another category may be sensitive
strings. There's all sorts of different categories that we could
come up with. We may come back to that later on and say okay,
well, this should be the process for applying for a brand but this
other process may be appropriate for applying for a geographic
top-level domain and yet this third process may be better for
applying for a sensitive string because there's different
considerations. So we envision, like I said, coming back to these
overall questions throughout the time period that this working
group is in operation.

JORGE CANCIO:

Page 19 of 54

Thank you so much for this reaction. We had Norway.

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

NORWAY:

EN

Yes. Thank you. Also just a general comment on the -- on this
issue. And I was -- I appreciate your thoughts about how to
approach this issue with possibly new rounds or opening for
new applications and so on.

Looking at that, I think it's

important -- as you also mentioned -- that it's important to look
at lessons learned from our first round, evaluate what was a
success and what -- what areas did we have problems and
disputes, et cetera.

So I think it's important not to try to

reinvent a new Applicant Guidebook but to use the baselines
that are already there and not opening up all the problematic
issues that could -- could open up and create even more
problems that we had in the first round. So I think that's an
important issue to be mindful about. And I think also it's a good
idea, as you are talking about some categories, of course, I
remember we talked about categories before we made -- during
making the Applicant Guidebook and, of course, as you said, you
had some problems with maybe some community applications.
Maybe that's something that can be addressed further to have
better and clearer criteria, et cetera, for those kind of
applications. And also I think also what have been made in the
lessons learned about the diversity, et cetera, and the spread of
geographic areas that are underrepresented, et cetera, and so
on. So there are other mechanisms maybe that could be looked
at. But -- so just looking forward to continue working and
inputting to this process. So also thanks to Jorge being part of
Page 20 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

this working group and looking forward to the further work.
Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you very much, Ornulf. And so I may take that as a
commitment to participate in the working group?
[ Laughter ]
Well, we will talk about that later. In any case, I think that the -the first comment made by Ornulf also fits well with -- if I'm not
mistaken -- with the scope of the working group which is to
review the 2007-2008 policy recommendations and in view of
what has happened to see whether there are adjustments
needed. But we already had a queue. Who was next? First
Germany, then Cook Islands, I think, and then New Zealand and
then Thailand. And Spain. Do you have them? And the U.K.
Okay. Let's start with Germany.

GERMANY:

Thank you very much. Hi, this is Sabine from Germany. I just
wanted to quickly come back -- Jeff, I'm here -- on actually what
you said, Jeff, and also things that Avri touched upon re, you
know, predictability, flexibility, but also the different types of
possible rounds or applications that you could have because
you brought up, you know, a process, for example, for sensitive

Page 21 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

strings. So my immediate reaction was, okay, but then who says
what is a -- what is a sensitive string, what isn't, and especially
how do you keep working on those categories if it's not -- if it
doesn't turn out to be a rounds-based system. So is there any
thinking on that already?

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Let's take some more reactions first and then go with the
answers. So we had -- now we had Cook Islands, please.

NEW ZEALAND:

Sorry. It's New Zealand, not Cook Islands.

JORGE CANCIO:

Apologies.

NEW ZEALAND:

It's all right. We're close to each other. So my question is, just
generally on the process. We -- the challenge for commenting,
from what I can see, is that we're in some ways interrogating the
objective of having gTLDs at the same time as having a look at
the specifics of how many applications, should we do
community applications. I was just wondering if you could talk a
bit about the sequencing of the round.

Are we looking to

confirm the objectives of the gTLDs before locking in the

Page 22 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

specifics? Are we working toward an existing idea of what gTLD
projects should bring about as outcomes, or is it that we submit
and from that we're trying to create a set of common objectives
that the community wants from gTLDs? Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Perhaps we could try to answer the comments we had so
far and go then with the next in the list, would be the U.K.

AVRI DORIA:

So thank you for the two questions. When looking at them -- so
you're right. And I'm going to take them sort of as a mixed
question. But we are asking questions, for example, as Jeff had
said. If we got to an answer that everyone had said, no, there
should be none, then the rest of the questions might matter very
little. But we didn't want to start with just one question and do
a sequential like that. And I guess there's certain presumption
that there's going to be a certain amount of interest within the
community for more. So we definitely will be combining the
answers. We will be looking at the various parts and such.
When looking at things like flexible and whether there's a round
or not, I think there's very much a feedback between those two.
When we're looking at -- in fact, that's partly come up in
conversations already when we're saying, Well, what would

Page 23 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

happen if we did a first come, first served? How would that
work? How would we deal with people contending for the same
name? How would we deal with issues of: Is this a brand? Or
would we just do this is a time for brands? This is a time for that.
So those are the questions we're actually asking while
interpreting the other questions.
And, basically, it is a combinatorial process of looking at the
various pieces of answers and putting them together to try and
get a fuller picture.
And as Jeff said, once we think we have a first snapshot of that
picture, we will be putting that out again and getting more
comments.
One of the last comments I wanted to add on that is there was a
previous comment about lessons learned. And, indeed, what
wasn't mentioned here is that we're getting the lessons learned
from the use of territory and names. We're getting the consumer
-- competition, consumer trust, and consumer choice comments
and feeding those in and getting all the other comments.
We're getting comments that we had from the outreach to -- we
had pending comments from the GAC in terms of outreach to
development areas and how to help support areas that needed
assistance in paying for these things that in the last round came

Page 24 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

sort of at the end and tried to track them in. Whereas, this time
a lesson learned is include those things from the beginning.
So, basically, it really is trying to gather as much of this
information as we can and combine it and then move on with
draft answers, we think we heard this from the community, and
come back and then move on to the next level down in the
issues.
And, also, lastly, one of the reasons for hoping that we have lots
of people from every community participating is because we will
have clarifying questions of you. And when we get a comment,
we're going to want to be able to go back and sort of say, We
understand this but we don't quite understand that and really
create a dialogue over time in terms of really understanding the
answers we get.

JORGE CANCIO:

I think we are starting this dialogue here right now, so it's very
good. I think we had the U.K. first and then Thailand and then
Spain, please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes, thank you, Jorge. And thank you very much, Jeff and Avri,
for setting out the framework, for a very open and inclusive
process for examining this issue in its entirety and very much

Page 25 of 54

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

picking up on the lessons learned that you've just been
recounting in various elements.
The GAC concluded back in Marrakech that we should look at
the experience of community-based gTLD applications. We said
that we would undertake some analysis. And, indeed, we have
now, courtesy of the Council of Europe, two experts who have
started work, Eve Salomon and (saying name), who some of you
actually know -- they have been talking to you, Avri -- to start
looking at the whole background on community-based
applications, looking at the kind of factors that determined why
there were actually so few applications submitted in the current
round and to look at the experience of those applications that
were submitted. So that work will continue, and we will want
that to feed into the working group as an input from the GAC. So
that's a very important element, I think.
The opportunity, the vision, if you like, of the round was that
there

should

be

opportunities

for

community-based

applications, and there should be some prioritization process
and so on. So we will look at all of that and help you with that
aspect.
My other point that I wanted to take the mic was to understand
better really where the economic and cost-benefit analysis is
featuring in the preparatory work.

Page 26 of 54

You know, what is the

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

opportunity? Perhaps in the experience of brand applications,
many of them felt, well, they had to do it to defend themselves.
There wasn't really a sort of business case that one might have
thought there could have been. Maybe other brands did have
some kind of business case.
The whole sort of economic and the benefits analysis I think
would be very useful to understand.

And if you're

commissioning work on that, it would be very useful to know
about it and to be able to track that.
I think those are the main two points I wanted to make at this
point. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Thank you. That was very helpful. Let's take, first,
Thailand and then respond to both. Thank you.

THAILAND:

Okay.

Wanawit from GAC Thailand.

From the new gTLD

subsequent round or even this current round, the IDN is also one
of the important aspects of new gTLD. And when you talk about
the IDN for the U-label, the country that do not use the ASCII,
what we normally call, it's still something new. So I think I do
see the big gap between the technical communities that are

Page 27 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

dealing with all the terms we call LGR, label generation, drew
the cross groupings among the characters.
At the policy level, there is a huge gap there. I don't know
whether any GAC members here were aware of the roles, that
you need to dealing with this as well, because your characters,
your country, nobody else could make a decision.
That are the issues on the question and really choose if it could
touch on the issue of IDN from the experience on the current
round, that would be very helpful and could be made the GAC
roles that we led to more than the technical part's communities
that dealing with and how the GAC do see the potential regs
because this is a cross-cutting issue. It could lead to the trust,
consumer trust. It also could lead to security aspects and also
create the confusion for the users in the Internet.
And I think if we can have some area of work that led to the IDN
specifically, that would be great. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you so much. Would you like to react to these very
substantial comments?

Page 28 of 54

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

JEFF NEUMAN:

Yeah, thanks. There was a lot in there so those were great
comments. I'll start with the IDNs first, and then I'll touch on the
other questions. We do have one of our -- we're calling the work
tracks after we get through some of the overarching questions.
One of our work tracks is devoted exclusively to IDNs and also to
universal acceptance, which is partially an issue with IDNs but
it's also an issue with ASCII top-level domains.
So we definitely think that that's important for us to learn about,
lessons learned, but also to understand the technology and the
policy implications behind that.

And any help that GAC

members can provide would be greatly appreciated. That is one
of the tougher areas and one I personally have the least amount
of experience in. So I certainly am looking forward to that work
being done and learning more about that because it is incredibly
important. And it's probably one of the -- between universal
acceptance and some of the technology not being caught up to
be able to be use the IDNs effectively is probably one of the
biggest -- or the biggest reasons why those -- I believe those
haven't taken off as much as I believe there is potential for them
to be used.
On the community-based questions, I am absolutely looking
forward to that cost-benefit -- or to the analysis being done on
the communities. I think that's some great work. And I'm glad

Page 29 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

to hear that that's going on and absolutely look forward to
seeing the results or even talking to the people doing the study.
Avri just mentioned that they had reached out to her. So I would
absolutely love talking to them and having the working group
talk to them to share their experiences.
I think community -- I agree. I think there were a lot less
community-based applications than what I thought there would
be. And part of that could be that it was so difficult to qualify as
a community.
And so certainly some lessons learned on that and how we can
have a balance to make sure that communities can actually find
a space, find their space, and not be hindered by some of the
criteria that were established, I think, would be something that
would be great to develop going forward. So I'm absolutely
looking forward to that.
And with respect to cost-benefit analysis, you know, that's one
of the tasks -- there was a question yesterday to the CCT review
team, or to Jonathan Zuck, as to whether we're coordinating our
efforts. And I think I would concur with Jonathan's answer
yesterday, that we are definitely coordinating, making sure that
we're not overlapping in the work that we're doing. So costbenefit analysis is one of the areas that Jonathan and the CCT
review team is working on. We fully expect to take the findings

Page 30 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

from the CCT review team and incorporate them into our work.
So that is something that we're looking forward to getting from
the CCT review team in the weeks and months ahead.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Avri, anything to add?

AVRI DORIA:

No. Well, actually, only one thing on the IDNs. And one of the
things that became obvious, that it is part of mixed with the
outreach part and making sure that the people that actually
would use IDNs and live with them are the ones that know about
this, know about this in time to be able to apply.
So another thing we need to look at is how the outreach was
done to communities, to IDN-using communities, and not just
having IDNs be translations of perhaps existing names but to,
basically, start getting some innovative use among people using
different scripts and languages.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you so much.
I think that there are some fields of synergy emerging there,
IDNs, the work that has been done also by GAC members on the
underserved regions where we have a working group whose co-

Page 31 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

chair will be participating in the cross-community session this
afternoon; the work about community-based applications. So I
would invite colleagues to take this as an ongoing process, as a
beginning of an engagement in this work.
I had Spain and then Egypt, please.

SPAIN:

Thank you very much, Jorge.
I don't know if I'm going to add to the synergies or quite the
contrary.
The first set of questions, the overarching questions you are
asking, deal with whether we need or there should be additional
new gTLDs in the future. I think that that could depend on the
demand for new gTLDs there are out there.
I would really like that serious a demand analysis is carried out.
And not demand by registries or registrars but demand by the
end users, be it individuals or entities, companies, institutions,
because I have the feeling that there is not a crave for new gTLDs
out there. The market is quite flooded now.
One indication of this is that many new gTLDs or second-level
domains in the new gTLDs are used to redirect to old domain
names that are under legacy new gTLDs, so many, many second-

Page 32 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

level domains in the new gTLDs were made as defensive
registrations. We should wonder whether we are not creating
new gTLDs just to increase the cost of end users in registering
them to protect their trademarks or their brands or creating
conflicts with peoples, local communities, countries that
sometimes may feel that they have been robbed of their -- in
their identifiers by someone who has nothing to do with the
country.
So I think that's -- new gTLDs cannot be created for the benefit
of registries and registrars but for the benefit of the whole
community, and that is something that must be taken into
account before any -- any new round or an ongoing mechanism
is put up. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you very much, Gema. I think this goes to the center of
the first overarching question, and as there is, I think, a remote
question which also addresses this topic, I would kindly ask Olof
to read it out.

REMOTE INTERVENTION:

Thank you, Chair, and it comes from Aaron Pace, who is not -- I
think I should underline that -- representing a GAC member or
observer, but we let it through.

Page 33 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

Anyway, a deceptively simple question going, I quote: Why is
there a holdup in opening a new round? End quote.

JORGE CANCIO:

So I don't know if -- are your questions, Manal, related to this
overarching question or -- yes?
So let's go for you, and then let us hear the answers from Jeff
and Avri. Thank you.

EGYPT:

Thanks. And thanks to Jeff and Avri, too. I'm afraid I have more
questions than answers at this point in time, but allow me first
to say that I'm glad to know you already have a track for IDNs
and I definitely agree that different categories should be treated
differently, but more generally, that any future rounds should be
based on lessons learned, like Norway said, from the previous
round.
So having said that, and seeing that the questions are futureoriented and future-looking, I'm wondering whether you
considered having a similar set of questions for the current
round. I mean, to get the sense how the current round is doing
and then draw conclusions from such questions.

Page 34 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

And also related towards what's been just mentioned, how are
we going to decide that this is enough, we don't need more?
I mean, I got stuck at the very first question, whether we need
more gTLDs or not, so what's the criteria to say that we don't
need any more? Is it the end user demand, "We're too confused
so this is enough"? Is it the business, "We're not doing well so
this is enough"? I mean, again, it -- it's not very clear how are we
going to set the bar and say, "This is enough," apart from
subjective reactions like a certain number or "This is enough" or
"Why are we holding the current" -- so I leave it here. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

If you want to take those questions.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Sure.
I think we're getting into some good controversial areas, so I get
to make some statements and hopefully that will spark some
more conversation.
But I think we got two interesting sides -- two interesting
questions back to back, one from Spain and then one from the
remote participant that were kind of two sides -- as Avri said to
me, they're two sides of the same coin, right?

Page 35 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

One is saying -- from Spain you're saying, "Why" -- "I don't really
feel like we need any more," and then we're getting comments
saying, "Why isn't it just permanently open?"
And so we're getting both of the comments and what we're
trying to do is trying to come up with a baseline. We don't know
the criteria yet. We're trying to develop some criteria.
For example, I could say that, you know, if you look at some Web
sites that have some statistics on new TLDs, there are 20 -- as of
today, there are 23,148,318 new second-level domains set up
and registered in the new gTLDs. That's a pretty substantial
amount of registrations.
I don't know the breakdown at this point of how many are
defensive versus redirect versus registrations that point to
content. You know, that -- I don't have that information yet and
that's information we'll try to obtain, but some would argue that
that does show demand.
It's also very difficult to show, in advance, demand.
To be a little controversial, I was in a discussion -- I was listening
to the discussion that you all were having on the three
characters, and I heard some countries, some governments,
saying that they would like to use the three characters for their
own government.

Page 36 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

We could ask the same question: Is there a demand by end users
to use -- to register those three characters or is that something
that the government and the country would actually like to put
out there to see if there is demand, right?
So I think there's -- it's very difficult to know, but if we put it out
there -- some would argue that if you put the TLD out there and
people register it, then there is demand.
Sometimes you can't measure that in advance.
But for brands, again, that's -- brands don't rely on end user
registrations, they rely on their own use, so I think it's a little
early to make any judgments as to whether brands registered
are purely for defensive purposes or registered to use them, so I
think that's something we'll see in the next few years.
But these are all great questions. These are questions that we're
getting as well. Hopefully we'll get some data behind that, and
hopefully we can figure out, going forward, how to deal with all
these questions on criteria, how do we measure whether we
need more new gTLDs.
And then there was another question about -- now I'm forgetting
it. Maybe Avri wrote it down, but -- yeah, I'll turn it over to you,
but if I think of it --

Page 37 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

AVRI DORIA:

EN

I don't know if you -- I don't know if I'll hit the question but it will
give you time to think of it.
I was thinking of two things.
One, I was thinking in terms of an answer of looking at what's
going on in the current, I believe that that's pretty much what
we're counting on most of the other reviews to do, but if we have
a question that isn't answered by one of those, I think we'll
certainly approach. And that's part of the sort of cyclical nature
we're taking to this, is: Come with some first questions, get
some answers, and then go digging.
One of the questions that I come up with, listening to your
question, is, I know anecdotally that for some people that do
buy the new names, the first thing they do is indeed map them
to an old name, because you want to use it immediately. And
then there's a development of new servers, new services. And
what I'd actually like to find out -- so it's something that I'll go
looking for after this -- is to what degree does that first map to
an old name remain that way as opposed to, in some time later,
becoming a native -- a native site on that name.
So that would be the kind of metric that I would look for to sort
of say -- yeah, it makes a lot of sense when you buy something, a
new name, that you map it to an old one, simply because you
want it to be immediately useful, but what do you do with it in

Page 38 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

the long run and what is the rate of change on that? How long
does that take to do it? Or do they remain permanently mapped
to their old .COM? Which I doubt but I'd really like to see the
end.
So I liked your question in terms of bringing up something that
would be good for perhaps CCT or one of the other groups to
actually go digging for.

JEFF NEUMAN:

So now I remembered and Avri did touch on it about lessons
learned.
When we get into the specific tracks that we look at, there are a
lot of things that we will be looking at that the CCT review team
is not going to be looking at due to the nature of -- they're
looking at consumer choice, trust, competition.
So for example -- and I just randomly turned to one of our work
tracks, which is Track 3, which is looking at string contention,
objections, and disputes.
Well, obviously the first thing that that track will look at is how
were the string similarity evaluations done in this past round?
Was it efficient? Was it effective? Was it fair?
They'll look at lessons learned and ways to improve it.

Page 39 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

For example, I'm sure they will look at the question that there
was GAC advice and there was input from, I remember, the
business constituency and a number of others on plurals versus
singular, right? We'll look at how that worked out, what was
good about that process, what was not so good about that
process, and how do we handle that going forward.
So as we get into the very specifics, we will absolutely be looking
at what happened in the last round and then seeing what
improvements could be made, if any, going forward.

JORGE CANCIO:

Good. Are there any follow-up questions? Nicholas and then
Thomas.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you, Jorge.
I kind of have the same question Germany asked a while ago
regarding sensitive strings, right?
I would like to know who and using what criteria -- I mean, who
establishes what is sensitive or controversial, and based on
what?

JORGE CANCIO:
Page 40 of 54

That's an easy question, right?

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

Let's take Thomas first, and so you have time to think about it.

THOMAS de HAAN:

Yes.

Thank you, Jorge.

And just coming back to the

fundamental question, would -- should there be a new round or
should there not be a new round, I think that's, of course, a
question which should be asked and answered before you go on.
I would give a slightly different perspective, as Spain gave,
saying, "Okay, is there a need?"
I think especially as governments, there is, let's say, the market
and there's also the, let's say, to let flourish the market we
shouldn't interfere with the market. Let the market decide
whether they want or not TLDs. It's not up to us, let's say.
And I think a second big consideration to take on board is the
fact that opening up a first round gives some expectations.
I mean, once you close the rounds and -- basically you're
interfering with the competition because you will be reinforcing
all the first thousand or more, which have, for example, very
attractive names. For example, I would say .BANK would be -- is
an attractive one as (indiscernible) case.

Page 41 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

If you don't allow any other string, that would be de facto
monopolizing, let's say, one specific very clear-cut business
case.
So I would say -- and that's -- maybe certain registries would not
like this who have applied for it, but why should there not be a
.BANKING or .NICEBANKS?
So it's -- I think we should take this very much in consideration
for the fundamental question. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. These are all very good points. Let's take also Iran,
please, before answering.

IRAN:

Thank you, Jorge. I think the question asked by our colleagues
about what is -- is the gTLD or new gTLD sensitive or not is a
difficult question. In view of one, something is insensitive; in
view of others, it's not insensitive at all.

Culture diversity

dominating. So I don't think that these type of questions, is it
sensitive or is it not, it gives any guidance.
And my question is asking the first question, do we need a new
gTLD? Is it really the question that we have to raise, or there has
been already some actions in that? We have heard in two

Page 42 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

consecutive meetings with ICANN Board and someone from
ICANN I don't main explain us even the time frame, so on and so
forth. So we come back saying what is going on is totally outside
or not to be taken into consideration.
I don't know what the need. Should there be any new gTLD or
not, is it a question that we have to raise, really?
Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Well, I think we have a set of questions on the table which have
been drafted, I guess, with the best of their ability by the
members of this very diverse working group. And, anyhow, over
to you.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. I'll take a first attempt at some of those. And one of
the things I do want to say is that, fortunately, the group is much
bigger than the two of us in terms of the ability to answer things.
I think in terms of sensitive strings, when I look at that, and this
is really a personal first take on it, first of all, there are many
different types of things that make a string sensitive.

For

example, we had issues of regulated industries and whether that
was an area of sensitivity.

Page 43 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

And so looking at a first-level analysis on what constitutes
sensitivity becomes part of the approach to that.
I think, you know, always having the multistakeholder process in
terms of solving these hard problems and taking the views of the
various stakeholders and stakeholder groups and discussions
and that. I think remembering, going back to always we have
the base; that at a certain point, you don't a priori define those
things. You have the ability to object and have some form of
adjudication for those strings that someone sees and didn't
think of beforehand as perhaps sensitive but sees and feels a
sensitivity for and presents a case to a review body.
So I think that any answer we come up with would be based on
not only what we've done before in terms of, you're right, at a
certain point we can't come up in the first instance and say,
"This is the list of sensitive strings," and we rely on what we have
which is the objection process, but that we can do some work on
that. We can look at certain types of string that there are
sensitivities about and perhaps do an analysis. Perhaps remove
certain kinds of sensitive strings from -- and make them a
different type.
You know, they may be a type of string.
So that's -- that is, I think, a big part of those answers, never
forgetting that we've got an existing application guidebook and

Page 44 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

we have a multistakeholder process to discuss these things and
discover the answers.
So that was my first attempt at that issue.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Yeah. And on the issue of blocking or, you know, can we -should we let the market just work and keep adding new TLDs, I
think that there are a number of people that have made that
exact argument.
You used the example of .BANK and should there be a .BANKING.
Some might -- There's a group -- a new group that's formed
called -- it's again another abbreviation -- VTLDs, the verified
top-level domains, and those are top-level domains like .BANK
and .PHARMACY that actually look at the credentials before
allowing anyone to come in, and you have to be a licensed
pharmacy for .PHARMACY or you have to be a licensed bank in
order to get a .BANK. The question would then become do we
allow a .BANK where they actually verify everything in advance
but then also allow a .BANKING with doesn't verify everything in
advance. And then what does that do the end user who learned
to trust .BANK and do their banking with .BANK but now you
have a .BANKING that doesn't necessarily have the same criteria.

Page 45 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

Are we asking for some fraud or some potential abuse on
consumers?
So there's a lot of things to think about in terms of opening
things up to anyone who wants to compete and anyone who
wants to introduce new top-level domains.

But there are

certainly definite views in here of whether we should limit the
number of TLDs or have -- you know, just completely let the
market do what it's going to do.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. I think we had a request from the public and Olga, and
Thailand. So, gentleman.

JODEE RICH:

Hi, my name is Jodee Rich. I'm the CEO of .CEO.
Hi, Jeff. Jeffrey!
Jeff, you used 28 million as a number to perhaps encourage us
that the new gTLD process had been successful.
Can I ask you to consider if it turned out that over 90% of those
28 million were either given away for free or sold for under a
dollar, would that influence in any way your proposition that
you think the program has been successful?

Page 46 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

JORGE CANCIO:

EN

Thank you for that question.
I'm mindful that we should finish in nine minutes, so I will do a
last call for questions.
And please be remind that this is only a warmup for the crosscommunity session we will be having here starting at 5:00 p.m.
with other constituencies in this same room.
So is there anybody else?
Iran, and then -- So let's take Olga, Argentina; Thailand; and then
Kavouss.

ARGENTINA:

Thank you, Jorge, and thank you Avri and Jeff for being with us.
I have a question about something which is written in the first
Applicant Guidebook but for some reason it was not, perhaps,
properly enforced in the process of the first round. It is that if
there is a geographic name, it is -- it could be advised that the
applicant get in touch with the relevant community or region or
subregion or whatever the river, mountain or region is located
to.
As we have been reviewing this issue in our GAC working group
on protection of geographic names in new gTLDs, we have seen

Page 47 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

that an early contact in between the applicant and the possible
impacted community could be advisable.
Are you foreseeing some way of making this part of the process
of applying for a TLD that could be relevant for a community or
for a region?

JORGE CANCIO:

We had Thailand.

THAILAND:

Yeah, thank you very much. I'm just following that Jeff mention
about to set out the criteria for each application types and tiers.
I just think about it's such a good idea because different type of
applications might be different -- the (indiscernible) needs to be
achieved; right? But I would like just to make sure that we
carefully reviewing process, because if you look at in the
branding, marketing, they have the power to set everything to
meet the criteria, versus at the community-based organizations
or even nonprofit organization, it might be hard for them to
meet the criteria. To make sure that whenever you set up the
criteria, to make it easy for all organization. Treat them equally
treatment to reviewing processes. That's to make sure that
everything is good for all who want to get the registration.

Page 48 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you. Very important point.
And, please, Kavouss, last question in this session.

IRAN:

Last question or last comment, perhaps. It's not question.
I said that in other occasions we should not engage in a purely
academical research in the ICANN. This is not the university of
ICANN.
If you open and widen the questions as much as you want, then
there would be no output or will be confusing output; that you
will be selecting some of the one that you wish, it would not
yield the output that is expected.
So we should be practical, and we should be mindful of the time
and effort and availability of those and not put the people
before fait accompli.
Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Page 49 of 54

Thank you so much.

EN

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

And the last intervention is for Jeff and Avri, very briefly. I guess
you also have another meeting now, and I also stand on the
strict instructions from my chairman to finish the session.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Okay. So there are a number of questions. Let's see if I can
respond quickly.
Jodee, thank you for your question on the statistics. I just want
to say you missed the beginning of the meeting where I said
don't necessarily believe everything I say. I'm going to make
statements that are controversial. I may or may not believe
them.
But what I said during that is that some people would point to
the fact that there are 23 million registrations to say that it's a
success; not necessarily that I would. But that's something that
we'll, as a group, look into.
Olga raised a question on geographic names and something in
the guidebook. Obviously there's work that's ongoing. Your
group is working on it.

Then there's the Cross-Community

Working Group. We're looking to the outcomes of that group
and look for some advice from you all, and then take that advice
and incorporate it into our work.

Page 50 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

Categories. There's been a number of questions on categories
and setting criteria.

I just threw out there some potential

categories, one being sensitive strings, just to get some reaction.
I don't know if that will or won't be a category. That's something
the group will discuss. But, obviously, if they come up with
categories, they're going to have to define what does and does
not meet those categories, tightly bounded so that it can be
enforced.
And, Kavouss, I am completely in agreement with your comment
that we need to be practical. A lot of the discussions that went
on for eight years and for the last round were theoretical,
philosophical, academic.
We now have a lot of data to see what actually happened so we
can focus on the practical questions and not have to worry
about what might happen. So thank you for that.

AVRI DORIA:

My last comment is in two hours, we'll be having the crosscommunity conversation where we can go on with this
conversation and to reiterate the invitation to get involved in the
group. Come and join. And we're counting on the fact that
Kavouss is there and will keep us honest all the way through.

Page 51 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Over to you, Chair.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And I think this has been an excellent session which
is quite different from how we discussed this issue a few years
back.
I would just, off the spot, think -- there are several elements that
have led to this. One, of course, is probably the more realistic
expectations now compared to those who wanted to make
millions and millions of money on the one side but also the
governments who were afraid that the world may go down if
there are no safeguards. I think we're all a little bit more relaxed
now that the world hasn't changed that much despite or
because of the new gTLDs.
But, also, I think the opening up of the GAC from having closed
sessions only a few years ago to being inviting, getting people
like you in, discussing things in the hope has, I think, made a
difference. We know each other better now. We discuss on a
different level of understanding of the issues. So I would like to
thank all of you who made this opening and this interaction
possible. I think this is the way to go.
And yeah, we're looking forward to having as many GAC
members as there are spaces here with the other people from

Page 52 of 54

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

EN

the community in the continuation of this discussion today. But
also, and this is in order to be sustainable, we need to have more
people than just one or two who signed up so far to participate
in the PDP. I think we all understand now how important this
discussion is. We understand the will of the GNSO to actually
take our views, inputs in. If we are not there, it's our own fault.
So we really have to be present and continue this excellent
discussion.
And just one last element. You have received the draft -- a first
draft of answers to the questions that they have sent to us.
Please have a look at them. The deadline is 22nd of July. But
let's try to use the time while we're here to work on these
answers and give some -- at this stage, we will not go into all of
the details, like the questions don't either, but try to give
meaningful input, also, via this written channel. That would be, I
think, also useful for all of us.
So it's 3:00 on the spot. We have 15 minutes to coffee. It's over
there. We have two chains to queue for coffee. So thank you
very much. It was a perfect session.
[ Applause ]

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 53 of 54

And thanks to Jorge and Tom as well for preparing this.

HELSINKI – Future New gTLDs Rounds: Policy Development

[ Coffee break ]

Page 54 of 54

EN

