HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 12:00 to 12:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So with this, we have to move to -- to an internal issue as well
but a very important internal issue, which is something that
we've started to discuss already at previous meetings.
This is about the secretariat of the GAC, the independent part of
our hybrid secretariat of the GAC that a funded on a voluntary
basis by GAC members.
I won't repeat all the history. We've discussed this, as I said
already, sometime before. As a quick, maybe, wrap-up, the last
time we discussed this in Marrakech, there was a request for
those who were willing to see internally whether they could join
the team, the group of funders, of donors to receive some
material about what the secretariat is doing, how it is working,
how it is financed, what the mechanisms are for money transfers
and accountability and transparency, who is signing the bills,
how the secretariat is reporting about what it does, and so on
and so forth.
We sent a number of documents out since then to all of you. We
hope that is sufficient. In case somebody needs additional

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

information or has further questions, of course we're happy to
answer them.
I think that the fact is, or to recall the facts, we've -- there was an
agreement in the GAC some years back that we need an
independent secretariat that would support us in -- not just in
logistics and in communication but also in helping to -supporting us in preparing decisions through briefing papers,
draft of documents, and so on and so forth. Making documents
of substantive minutes of meetings and the like. And we've had
three countries who generously stepped ahead and voluntary
funded the secretariat for five years. Each of them contributed
200,000 euros per year; i.e, each of them gave one million euros
over these five years.
We had some challenges in the beginning with the first version
of the secretariat and then we slightly modified the
arrangements and the concept, and we are now having ACIG in
charge since, I think, Buenos Aires 2013 or so. So I think it's like
almost three years.

And we did some analysis about the

appreciation of the secretariat. I won't go into detail. I think you
all know that we highly value the value added that ACIG's work,
in conjunction with, of course, ICANN staff, where there is
excellent cooperation on all levels between both parts of our
hybrid secretariat, on how important the quality and the
timeliness, also, of our work, which is getting more and more

Page 2 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

crucial, is the contribution by ACIG. I think we don't have to
repeat this.
So the issue that we would like to hopefully get one step closer
to a sustainability is the funding.

We have been informed

already some time ago that the current donors rightly said that
they will not be able to carry the burden alone forever; that they
made the first step to make this possible, but that they think
that this burden needs to be shared in a much broader way with
others. And that has been understood by everybody, I think, and
I think we've all acknowledged and thanked the current donors
for helping us to start with this and getting used to it. But that
now we need to spread this on many, many, many more
shoulders than just three, which is only fair. This is every other
international institutions, normally they have membership fees
where you may have some leverage on how much or how little
you can pay according to your available resources, but it's more
or less normal in most other cases that in the long run,
everybody has to somehow contribute to the funding also of the
infrastructure, let's say, of your participation in a committee or
in an institution.
So we've had the European Commission that has announced
that they are ready and willing to contribute with 50,000 euros
for the next five years to take on their responsibility. We've had
Switzerland who had announced that they are willing to also

Page 3 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

take responsibility and contribute with 50,000 Swiss francs
which is almost equal to euros for at least two years. We've had
Peru who has announced that they would be ready and willing
to contribute $2,000, which is a small amount but -- sorry? Oh,
but it's growing. So 2,500, and this is meant as a signal to other
countries with limited resources that you don't have to
contribute a very high amount.

If -- if small amounts get

together, they also become high amounts. So this is a very
welcomed signal by Peru that everybody should somehow
contribute with whatever you can, and this may also vary over
time. Governments may have more resources one year, less
another year. But this is a clear invitation to everybody to give
something, because if that's not gonna happen rather soon,
yeah, we -- we are getting to what will happen there so -- but I
see Peru you have your hand up. So Peru and then the European
Commission.

PERU:

I wanted to let everyone know and, of course, you Thomas, you
know this better than no one, that for governments to give an
amount of -- a fund for ICANN, it's impossible because this is not
an international organization. So we have to find a way around
this impossibility. And we did what Brazil had done before us,
and we -- but the entity that is giving the $2,500 is the .PE, the
entity that is in charge of administering our name. So perhaps

Page 4 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

our experience can help others. In fact, I have been telling our
colleagues from Latin America that we can all more or less do
the same, no? Reaching out to the companies that administer
our respective dot names, no? That's it.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Peru. Before giving the floor to the commission,
European Commission, in fact, it is to different degrees a
challenge for many governments, depending on your legal bases
and of your ministries or your agencies and some innovative
thinking, I would say, is required in many cases to find a way to
actually be able to contribute. And using the common interest
between a government agency and other private institutions
who have the same goal in terms of delivering services to your
citizens and your businesses. And Peru and Brazil are good
examples of how this can be done in a multistakeholder
corporation also to get the funding for the GAC for part of the
GAC secretariat. So this is a very welcome initiative, and I'm very
happy to hear that discussions are going on on how your
solutions can be an inspiration for others finding solutions as
well. European Commission.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

Thanks, Thomas. I just wanted to correct the record for one
thing. You said that the European Commission was going to

Page 5 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

contribute 50,000 per year over five years. And, of course, that's
what we want to do, but our legal commitment for the moment
is just for 2016, just so the record is clear, because otherwise I'll
go back and get in trouble.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And we don't want you getting in trouble. We want
you to have a good life. So thank you for this clarification.
Japan and Argentina and Brazil. Yes, go ahead. Thank you.

JAPAN:

Let me express my appreciation to the colleague who donated
for financially contributing to the GAC activities.

Japan

understands that funding from the more members necessary to
maintain the services currently provided by ACIG.
On the other hand, the current funding scheme depends on
voluntary contribution.

Therefore, in general we feel it

necessary to find other sustainable funding scheme, for
example, membership as Thomas said, so that the GAC
members can share the cost regularly. At the same time the
scheme should be developed in order not to try to hinder any
representatives in participating in GAC meetings due to
economic reasons. So in the case of Japan, budgetary requests
can be submitted to the finance authority in every summer and

Page 6 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

it is followed by a (indiscernible) Processes by the finance
authority and the national (indiscernible) Which usually goes
along to the next spring and later. Please note that making a
transparent funding scheme is a prerequisite for this sort of
budget request in my country. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much. Just a quick answer. We know that -that, of course, there's a procedure in every administration for
asking for money and so on and so forth. This is why we have
produced the documents that we were requested to produce,
and as I said, if somebody needs some -- something additional,
that will be provided.
Where is my list of lists. Argentina, Brazil, and Thailand, right?
Argentina.

ARGENTINA:

Thank you, Chair.

I would like to change a little bit the

perspective of this exchange of ideas and share with you an idea
that I have. And if you give me some feedback, that could be
very useful.
There is a cross-community working group about auction
proceeds. These funds that are received by ICANN from the
auctions of the different new gTLDs that were in contention. So

Page 7 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

these funds are analyzed by this cross-community working
group, and there is a charter that's being developed and a
procedure to assign these funds. I thought that it could be
possible if -- if it's a good idea for the GAC, that we may try to
apply for some funds for funding the secretariat. We have to
have in mind that these funds come from -- from ICANN in a way
that it's from the auctions but it's from ICANN, so I don't know if
this is a good -- acceptable or not for us. But the funds are there
and it's for funding an independent secretariat of the largest
group within the ICANN community, because we have more than
1 -- 160 -- more countries.

So if you could give me some

feedback, I am a member of the cross-community working group
and I can bring some ideas if this is feasible to have in mind
when we are drafting the documents. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Maybe before -- before going through the speaker's
list, I think there's one thing that I wanted to say before the
discussion started, is that the fact is that for this year the money
is there for having the secretariat resources on the level that
we've got used to, knowing that the demands are rising and
ACIG is actually already now working more hours than what is in
the agreement so far. They have been flexible and tolerant. And
for next year the contract that we currently have with ACIG that
goes via ICANN, because the GAC is not a legal entity, the

Page 8 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

contract ends three weeks after the June meeting next year.
That means somewhere mid-July. And for the time being there's
no secured funding for 2017 as a whole. Not even for -- for the
first half year of -- as long as the contract goes.
What we need to keep in mind is I'm confident that we somehow
will be innovative enough to get the fund, but we need some
time to develop a new contract in case that necessary because,
of course, ACIG as a private company, they need to be able to
plan their resources. Like we need to budget our budgets, they
need to budget their budgets. They need to know what the
expected income will be, ideally the year before. So that they
can like budget like any other entity.

We are at a critical

moment now between now and Hyderabad where in Hyderabad
at the latest we will have to plan based on the money that we
have secured for the next year. So this is -- so that we're very
clear, this is the situation that we're in. Whatever we will not
have secured by Hyderabad we will not be able to build and plan
on that. This is the situation. Or the end of the year. So there is
a gap to fill, which is there. It is not impossible to fill. It depends
on -- mainly on the political will of all of us to fight internally. Of
course, we all have budget cuts and so on and so forth, but it's
also a question about making -- making the benefit of this
understood. And with regard to what Olga has said, that there
are different ways of securing this funding. We can, as we have

Page 9 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

done so far, use voluntary contributions for this. We can discuss
whether we would introduce a compulsory contribution of
everybody. There are pros and cons of this. But this is a
discussion that needs to be held.

Like membership fees,

whether that is something that we are more confident that in
the long run it may make it more sustainable. An alternative is
to see if ICANN as an institution is willing -- is seeing the value
added of a good working GAC, including a good working
secretariat and that ICANN, who's spending a lot of resources on
government engagement in the countries on capacity and
outreach, whether co-funding from ICANN to an independent
part of the secretariat is something feasible is an idea that we
should follow. This is not dependent on us. This is dependent
on ICANN, whether or not this works. So I think we have to
explore all possible channels to get there. Because we need to
fill a gap that is currently existing. So if -- if nothing more is
coming that what we have so far, we won't have a secretariat
after July next year. That is the situation.
So let me --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Page 10 of 25

(Off microphone).

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Excuse me? The gap for the time being is about 200, 300,000
Euros. So if we divide this through 168 countries, it's not that
much. But, of course, not every country will be able to pay next
year. So let me continue with the speaking order. I have Brazil,
Thailand, and Norway for the time being.

BRAZIL:

Thank you, Thomas. And as one of the original donors to the
GAC secretariat through the generous contribution of the
Brazilian Internet steering committee, CGI, let me publicly state
once again that Brazil is very satisfied with the high quality
services provided by ACIG. The regular briefings prepared for
the GAC have proven to be, at least for us, extremely helpful in
our preparation process to the ICANN meetings. As you know,
Brazil has been one of the most vocal supporters of GAC having
an independent secretariat who should, as has been the case,
work together in a mutually reinforcing way with the staff
provided by ICANN. This, I will call hybrid, combination has
proven to be very effective and I would say essential to help
specially-developing countries in preparing for the sometimes
very technical discussions we have in the GAC.
After three years, however, the costs associated with the help
funding ACIG have proven to be beyond our limited capacity. We
therefore would like to state in public that at this point in time

Page 11 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

Brazil is not in a position to continue funding the GAC secretariat
as of 2017 without a clear commitment of a broader number of
countries to do so.

We sincerely hope ACIG's valuable

contribution can be continued. We encourage more countries to
do so. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you for this very clear message. Thailand, Wanawit.

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

Okay. I've been discuss about this issue about a year ago,
together with the CGI.BR. A big thanks for Brazil to initiate that
and I support this. So I do see that the procedure of every
government, especially in Asia Pacific, it will be very difficult. I
also discussed it and currently I working with the Asia-Pacific
TLD. We managed to get our agenda in in the APTLD meeting
70th in September 15 to 16 and APTLD is the association of the
groups of the stakeholder that related to top-level domain. So
all the AP country is participating in that. And we have a luxury
that the chair is one of our ex-GAC. Lim, Singapore, is our
chairperson.
So I have discussed briefly. And what I ask in here is also if we all
agree on this move, so I will continue working with the APTLD.
And I would like to request all the AP GAC to start talking to your

Page 12 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

members of APTLD to support us because I should not go there
and then all the members in the TLD do not aware of this.
So at least if you could, please, help me communicate with your
local TLD stakeholder in your territory telling them that this is a
need and please do support.
So I think this also one of the very sustainable mechanism I do
see because to have the entire AP to support this through the
community of TLD, but I need all of your help.
So if you just getting the mail from the GAC regarding this issue
and did not start to talk with the local stakeholder, I think please
do so. Talking with them before September. So you can go to
APTLD, see the board member, who it is, and if you know them.
So please start to have a conversation with them how important
it is to have their independent secretariat. That will help me to
push this thing through in the board of APTLD. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Wanawit.
I think this is another excellent idea. So you can also share the
burden not just nationally with different stakeholders but
actually also in a region and use channels that you have to
maybe group your efforts together and come up with something
jointly. So thank you very much for taking this initiative. I want

Page 13 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

to strongly urge all AP -- all GAC representatives from the AP
region to see whether that would be something that you could
also support and help get something together from that region.
We are running slightly towards the end, so let's try and be short
all of us. I have Norway, Belgium, Canada, and Argentina for the
time being. Thank you.

NORWAY:

Yes, thank you, Chair.
My comments would also be very much in line with the
statement made by Brazil. Norway is also very happy with the
support that we have got from the independent secretariat.
Especially the preparation for the meetings, overview, issue
papers, et cetera, have helped us and other delegations in the
GAC to prepare and to participate in the meetings and to have
an active dialogue in this crucial time of, for example, the IANA
transition, et cetera.
So we think an independent GAC secretariat is crucial for GAC as
a participant in the ICANN multistakeholder environment. So we
really encourage other governments, countries to step forward
and contribute to this secretariat.
And I think also this goes for the Netherlands as well, as Brazil
said.

Page 14 of 25

If no major contributions will be provided by other

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

countries, we would also not be able to provide any
contributions from next year onwards.
So we really -- as our Chair said, we really need our contributions
now to be put in process, to be committed by the end of this
year, to be ready in 2017 onwards. If not, we will not have an
independent secretariat from the mid next year. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Talk about independence, if you are thinking about
becoming a donor, you will have no influence on the secretariat.
In terms of substance, the secretariat is also independent in its
substantive work from the donors.
And I have to say that during my period, and also Heather's
period, there has never, ever been an attempt by any donor to
use that fact to have an influence on substantive work, which is
something that is remarkable. And I think we may thank them
for that because it's not like this in all institutions that I know.
But I can confirm that the secretariat is also independent from
the donor. The donors give the money, make sure things are
properly done in terms of management, and that's it. So just to
make that clear.
Belgium.

Page 15 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

BELGIUM:

Yes, quickly. Just to inform you that we think also it's important
that the GAC has a secretariat like this and resources.
And we're currently in the process of asking our government
(indiscernible) to support the GAC on a recurring basis, so -- and
we're quite optimistic.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you for this signal. I think that's very appreciated that we
hear from countries that are preparing and working towards
being able to contributing some money.

So this is noted,

Belgium.
Canada.
I put you on the list.
Next is Canada, then Argentina, and then the gentleman.
Canada, please.

CANADA:

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We believe the funding of
the independent GAC secretariat is a very important issue for the
long-term -- with long-term implications for the GAC. So we are

Page 16 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

very pleased to see it discussed in this open and transparent
setting.
Certainly, we appreciate the urgency of the short-term situation.
But we can and should, I think, challenge ourselves to put a
long-term solution in place now so that we can avoid having this
discussion on a regular basis.
The long-term solution we ultimately decide to go with should
be sustainable and ensure that both accountability and
transparency are met in addition to independence.
And in this regard, we agree with the point made by you and by
Argentina that an ICANN-funding option should be explored by
the GAC leadership. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

And, of course, you're right.

We have two

challenges. One is the short-term situation, and the other one is
the long-term situation. And it's not an either/or. We have to
get both things right.
Argentina.

Page 17 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

ARGENTINA:

Thank you, Canada, for your comments. And, of course, we want
to thank the donor countries and the excellent work made by
our colleagues from ACIG.
So it is okay if we explore this option. I just see if there's a strong
opposition or not so we move forward with that option of the
funding from the auctions fund.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think we should explore all options.
Are you from Timor-Leste?

NIGERIA:

We are from Nigeria.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Nigeria. Please, go ahead.

NIGERIA:

We actually support the fact that ICANN should explore more
options for funding. And we in Nigeria, we support the funding.
Unfortunately, we receive the notice lately we could not have
included it in our budget.

But we will discuss with our

government for possible funding by the next year. Thank you.

Page 18 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you very much, Nigeria.
Actually, there's some countries who are looking in this. And
some according to your principles, if you can't give any -- if you
can give something this year, perfect. If you can give something
starting next year, equally good. There's some that say, well, we
have even passed a budgeting process for 2017.
If you can only start giving something in 2018, you will be part of
the sustainable solution of the future. It's basically welcomed.
So thank you very much for this.
European Commission and Netherlands and Iran, and then I
think we have to conclude the discussion here but the work, of
course, has to go on.
So, briefly, European Commission.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

Thank you very much.
Just with respect to the use of the proceeds from the auctions, I
have no objection to raising it as one possibility. I think it will
not be very successful, but let's see.
But perhaps you would like to think about that in combination
with other ideas such as membership fee, such as offsetting the
membership fee of countries under a certain per capita per

Page 19 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

annum income to allow them to participate more -- rather than
just saying we want to use the funds from the auction.
So I think if we put it in a slightly different context, perhaps it will
be easier to even get past the first hurdle in terms of discussion
and looking at it. Thanks.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.
Iran.

IRAN:

Thank you, Chairman.
The use of the money from auction was discussed at one of the
public meetings, and it is under discussions. At least it was. I
don't know.
But there is a procedure on that. It is not up to the ICANN board
to decide, okay, I give 50,000 to that. It's whether the proceeds
allows how to do that. There are many, many elements how
that money should be spent. So before formally making, it is
better we discuss to see where we are.
And then coming to the proposal from European Commission
based on the income per capita and so on and so on, we don't
want to repeat the U.N. practice. More money, more influence.

Page 20 of 25

EN

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

If there is such a thing, it should be totally optional saying, okay,
if you pay this, no influence. Don't say I pay this because of that,
I want that influence. So I don't think we should take that
approach.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think there's a slight misunderstanding. I think the idea of the
European Commission was that if you introduce something like
a membership fee, that would stem from the idea that
everybody has to somehow contribute.

But knowing that

different levels of resources available, that there would be a
choice of level of contribution.
Like you have it in the ITU, you have -- you can pay one unit. You
can pay up to 30 units, but you can also go down to a fourth of a
unit. So this is just something that is -- to float it. We could say
we define one unit of a contribution is $1,000 or 1,000 Swiss
francs or a thousand euros. And every country should think
about how many units can we take. Can I take one unit? Can I
take 50 units? So far if a unit was a thousand euros, the free
donor countries have taken 200 units per year, for instance.
Peru will take two units. European Union will take 50 units. So
that would allow everybody to have a concrete scheme that you
could discuss internally and so on and so forth.

Page 21 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

But this is an idea for, let's say, a long-term, sustainable way. In
the short-term, we just need pragmatic voluntary contributions
in whatever amount. So there is two parallel tracks.
The Netherlands and then New Zealand, and then I think need to
stop here because we want to have a few minutes to eat. But it's
good that there is engagement on this.
Netherlands, please.

NETHERLANDS:

Yes, thank you. I will be very short. Just concurring with my
colleague from European Commission that although this is an
option proposed by Argentina, we really should not rely, let's
say, on this as a kind of alleviating on the short-term. It doesn't
make the urgence lower, I think, at this moment. We need really
donations.
I'm really very glad to just -- adding to my two other donor
colleagues, really glad that now we have two potential new
donations. But I would like to add also that these are relatively
small countries or, let's say, less developed countries. And I
would urge also the bigger countries, the developed countries to
be -- let's say, as we say, put butter to the fish in the
Netherlands, meaning you get something and you get
something in return for it. Thank you.

Page 22 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you, Netherlands, for that clear message again.
New Zealand.

NEW ZEALAND:

Thank you, Chair. We do support having a look at ways that we
can get long-term funding in place for the secretariat. They
provide a marvelous service, particularly to developing
countries and those who need briefings before they come to
ICANN due to language challenges.
We support the proposal to have a look at different options
within ICANN, including the gTLD proceeds from auctions but
also the different ways that ACs already receive funding in ICANN
and how GAC sits within that.
We do have some concern with the option of taking membership
fees, and I'm happy to have a look at it. But we just want to flag
that would probably make us, I understand, the first AC to take
membership fees. And that for many of us, we consider our
existing contribution through our ccTLDs to ICANN to represent
our national contribution. Thank you.

Page 23 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you. I think we have an agreement that we should look at
all options, and we have no choice because whatever we would
miss is a missed opportunity.
So we need to continue the debate. What I would suggest is that
we may form an informal team to look at the ICANN-related
options. I see there's some traction for looking at this. But that
is some work.
So what you said, New Zealand, there would need to be some
analysis on what is the money available, how is money used in
ICANN for other SO/ACs. How is money also used for engaging
with governments, and what would be options to, yeah, get
some out of this for supporting the hybrid secretariat.
So I think we have to stop here. Tom, do you want to add
something maybe quickly? Thank you.

TOM DALE:

Very, very quickly, Thomas. Thank you. It's good to be talked
about, but I think I should just give you a very quick view of our
company's understanding of the current situation.
As Thomas has said, there is a very hard and a very legal stop on
the current contract. It is three weeks after the June meeting.
That three weeks is to allow us to do final work on for that final
meeting of preparing minutes and other documentation. There

Page 24 of 25

HELSINKI – Funding for the Independent GAC Secretariat

EN

are no current negotiations for a new contract with ICANN or
with anyone else at the moment.
The funding situation, you've discussed at the moment. Clearly,
the funding for further services at this level beyond June next
year is not currently available.
And, finally, our company is willing and able to continue to
provide services to the GAC. And ACIG means a team of people,
of course, not just me. But for the situation from the middle of
next year, the matter is currently out of our hands and we will be
happy to cooperate with any requests for information or other
assistance. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tom.
This is the lunch break.

[ Lunch Break ]

Page 25 of 25

