HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 08:15 to 09:15 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

MARK CARVELL:

Good morning. This is the meeting of the working group on
human rights and international law. Thank you very much for
coming at this early hour. It's much appreciated.
First of all, to introduce myself, my name is Mark Carvell from
the United Kingdom government. I'm one of the co-chairs of the
working group, along with Jorge Cancio, from Switzerland to my
left, and there is a third co-chair, Milagros Castanon from Peru,
who hasn't arrived yet but we're expecting her to arrive shortly.
So you have the luxury of three co-chairs for this important area
of work.
And just to recap, especially if you're new to the GAC and new to
this particular working group, a little bit of the history. The
working group was established last year, I think. It really came
together at the Singapore meeting, as I recall.

And work

proceeded from that meeting to prepare terms of reference,
which were agreed at the Marrakech meeting earlier this year.
And you can see the terms of reference on the GAC's website
under the working group's heading.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

Briefly, to summarize the terms of reference, the working group
will focus on ICANN's policies and procedures which relate to
human rights and relevant international law. Its objectives are
to consider any steps that ICANN could take to ensure the
technical coordination of the Domain Name System is managed
in a way which respects human rights and relevant international
law consistent with ICANN's Articles of Incorporation; in
particular, Article IV.
Secondly, our objective is to cooperate with the other advisory
committees and supporting organizations, and, indeed, the wide
roster of constituencies in ICANN on issues relating to human
rights and international. And as you may be well aware, there is
a cross-community working party on corporate and social
responsibilities

--

on

ICANN's

corporate

and

social

responsibilities to respect human rights. Very long title. I think
we'll probably refer to the acronym from now on, the CCWP.
And, indeed, we will have a meeting with the CCWP, which is
chaired by Niels ten Oever, who some of you may know. We'll
have a meeting tomorrow at 3:00 in room Veranda 1, I think it is.
So I hope you will be able to join that. And that is an opportunity
for us to connect with the Cross-Community Working Party for
us to hear how their work is progressing and for us to report on
our work in the cross-community -- sorry, in the GAC Working
Group on Human Rights and International Law. So we have that

Page 2 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

sort of channel of direct interaction with a -- with a community
work party. So that's a second objective which is set out in the
terms of reference.
And the third objective, which I think is very important and
relevant to our discussion this morning, is participation in work
streams that are going on, being undertaken or work streams
that will emerge where human rights and international law are
going to be very relevant.
So those are our sort of, in summary, our principle objectives,
and we would come on to the substance of the meeting to
discuss how we're going to do that with the work plan, which is
on the screen. We'll turn to that very shortly.
Our working methods are broadly to undertake some analysis
and consideration of issues relating to human rights and
international -- relevant international law, and make proposals,
which we would then submit to the GAC for approval as inputs
into other processes in the wider community, in the work
streams and PDPs, and so on, which -- where our focus of
activity will be, as we will discuss with the work plan shortly.
And we will meet as a working group at every GAC meeting, and
we will hold ad hoc interaction with other processes going on as
a working group. And as I mentioned, there is the linkage that

Page 3 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

we're creating through discussions with the Cross-Community
Working Party, the CCWP, as an example of that.
As reference points, perhaps, it's worth stating in this context
one of the key ones, which some of you may be familiar with, is
the U.N. Guiding Principles on Business and Human Rights,
which, in our terms of reference, we identified as a potential
framework for examining ICANN's respect for human rights and
relevant international human rights law. So those U.N. Guiding
Principles are worth looking at.
And relating to that, I would just draw your attention to a report
which has come out very recently by the U.N. special rapporteur
on promoting and protection of the rights of freedom of opinion
and expression, David Kaye, U.N. special rapporteur, he has just
produced his 2016 report, and in that he takes a first look at the
private sector's role in -- in the digital age in respect of human
rights and identifying where potential guidance is needed.
It's a first report, as I understand it. There will be -- David Kaye
will be producing a series of reports. And that does reference
ICANN. If you look at that report, you will see that he surveys the
range of actors in the digital area, and included in that is ICANN
and ICANN's role in respect of coordinating and allocating
domain names and expanding the Domain Name System, and so
on.

Page 4 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

So that's a kind of real affirmation, really, of how what we are all
contributing to here in ICANN has resonance in terms of rights -in particular, freedom of expression and opportunity, as we look
ahead to the work. So it's a useful -- I think we're going to post
that report on our website. Are we intending to do that? We will
do that, and it's worth taking a look. And as I say, that is an
ongoing series of reports that the U.N. special rapporteur will
prepare.
So that's, in summary, the context for the work of the working
group. And since Marrakech, we, the co-chairs, in consultations
with the GAC membership, have put together a template work
plan, what you see on the screen. In fact, it goes on to two
pages. But we will go through this shortly. I'll turn to Jorge to
work our way through the work plan.
And we also issued a call for volunteers from the working group
to lead on the items of areas of work listed in the work plan. As
you may have seen, we issued that call, and that's something for
us to now take forward in terms of setting this work plan into
action. We need to have leads who will engage with the various
processes, the PDPs and so on, and to report and to develop
opportunities for the working group to put together potential
inputs and proposals which, as I said earlier, we will then work
through the GAC plenary in order to then proceed to submit
them into those processes.

Page 5 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

So that's essentially the stage we're at. And if there are any
questions on that in terms of context, please raise your hand
now and we'll -- or comments you'd like to make on the way
forward, please raise your hand now. Otherwise, I'll turn to
Jorge to introduce the work plan in more detail and to work
through it.
I don't see any hands raised, so -- so with that, I'll turn to Jorge.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Hello. Good morning to everyone. And thank you again
for coming this early to this meeting.
Before I go into the work plan you've got on your screen, I just
would like to complement what Mark introduced with an
overview of the points we will discuss during this short session.
First of all, we have to go through the -- through the work plan as
finalized intersessionally, see the gaps we have to be filled and
try to see how we best allocate the many, many volunteers I
expect we will have for the different items.
Second point is to confirm who will take over the liaison activity
with the Public Safety Working Group, which was -- is also on the
work plan but was in our terms of reference as a consequence of
consultations with some of you during the process of finalizing
our terms of reference.

Page 6 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

Third point was also to discuss a possible invitation to IGO
members to summarize the relevance of the Human Rights and
International Law Working Group to the work on rights. And
then we have possibly the main discussion item, which is about
what is going on in the CCWG on accountability in regards to
issues relevant to this working group.
And finally, just as a point of confirmation, to discuss very briefly
what we will be doing during our Joint Working Group with the
CCWP on Human Rights and Corporate Social Responsibility,
who we are meeting this Thursday, as Mark said, in Veranda 1
from 15 hours to 1545.
So this was in -- this draft agenda was in our email to you of June
7th.
If there is no comment, we will proceed with it.
Thank you.
So the first point is to talk about the work plan. I guess you have
had a look at it. Do you have any general questions on the work
plan? Kavouss.

IRAN:

Good morning to everybody. Thank you, Mark. Thank you,
Jorge, for the presentation, for the work so far that has been

Page 7 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

done. I have a small question to raise. Mark asked whether
there are volunteers. No hand was raised. Perhaps it was too
early in the morning. Maybe in other later stage there will be
more hands, but what I'm asking that shouldn't we put our
efforts and focus, our activities, on an area which we may get a
more expanded information on this human rights? The group
dealing with that, whether you call them CCWP or part of the
CCWG accountability doesn't matter, was the second largest
group for Work Stream 2 after the jurisdiction and the time of
the many colleagues are very limited. But this is not the main
point. The main point is that the richness and the -- the degree
of information that we can get within or from that group with
more larger participation of many experts on this very complex
issue, is it different what they do or do we have two different
applications for DNS in GAC viewpoint or from GAC viewpoint
and from ICANN viewpoint or from community viewpoint or all
of them are going to one direction?
I think it might be advisable if you can put our efforts in one
area. There is considerable amount of work already done on
Work Stream 1 under the chairmanship of one of the co-chairs.
Sanchez. Leon Sanchez. And then there are something in the
report.

However, everything was postponed until we have

Framework of Interpretation of human rights. I think that will be
not quite productive if we divide our efforts. If you call for some

Page 8 of 27

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

meeting, virtual or something similar of that, and if somebody's
working on that group, it may not be available to this group and
vice versa. Or we may do two different things, two different
understanding.

Because our understanding of the issue is

limited because it's based on few people -- very few that are
attending but better in that group there are at least 42, plus
observer, up to 65 and 70 people.

So more input, more

information. I'm asking question. I'm not against your group.
It's very good. But I'm asking, what is the most appropriate way
to avoid duplications and concentrate all our efforts on the very
important area of human rights in the ICANN or in the Internet
activities. This is a simple question, and perhaps we should see
whether we have an answer to that. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you very much. Any other general comment? Well, I feel
this comment from Kavouss is very pertinent and it speaks to
how we were intending to organize this session. And also to how
the work plan is presented. In the end, it's a flexible instrument
and it depends -- and it's focused on -- on the activities that are
ongoing in the wider community and what it provides for is -- it's
a forum within the GAC to channel our inputs on human rights
and international law issues to these processes that are ongoing
in the -- in the wider community.

And as Kavouss rightly

mentioned, the efforts in the CCWG accountability, which as I

Page 9 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

said were the -- all the main discussion point for our session
today here, are probably the most relevant in the present
moment. So with this, I would like to go over the different items
in the work plan and just ask you to consider whether you would
be in a position to volunteer to the different items. As you see,
we have items 2-4, participation in the main policy development
processes going on in ICANN. Perhaps you don't have to answer
today. If these processes are just starting, to a great extent you
may reflect on the possibility of participating actively in these
PDPs in the coming weeks from here to Hyderabad and propose
yourself, volunteer, if you are willing to follow one of -- of these
items. So item number 2 is participation in the new gTLD
subsequent procedures, it should say, not subsequent rounds,
PDP. The third is the participation of -- in the new WHOIS PDP,
which is our Registry Directory Services PDP. And the fourth in
the review of the rights protection mechanisms. Nevertheless, if
there is anyone already volunteering at this moment, anyone
interested? No? Not yet? You have to reflect more? Okay. So
take your time and come back to us and inform us.
And then, of course, we have the item number 5 which is the
more pressing issue which is the participation of fellow working
group members or GAC members in general in Work Stream 2 of
the CCWG where probably the most important topic for this
working group is the development of a Framework of

Page 10 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

Interpretation of the human rights commitment which was
included in what was the recommendation 11 of the Work
Stream 1 report of the CCWG accountability which was included
as a bylaw provision in the bylaws adopted by the board on May
27 which will enter into force whenever the transition is -- comes
into effect. This would be starting in October, if everything goes
as planned. And there is, as Kavouss said, already a work about
to start in the CCWG accountability. The colleagues there from
the CCWG accountability will develop a Framework of
Interpretation of how to interpret the commitment on human
rights which has been included in the bylaws. So we expect a
clear and a short document to be developed by this working
group, and then this recommendation would have to be
adopted by the board and the -- by the chartering organizations
and the board to be implemented later on. But now it's the time
for anyone interested to participate in that work. It's in the
CCWG accountability in a subgroup which is being formed for
that where the discussions will take place. Of course, chartering
organizations, and the GAC is one of them, will be consulted on
the draft and the proposals. But if you want to really have a
direct influence on how this Framework of Interpretation is
formed, it's the time to engage and participate actively in the
CCWG accountability on this subgroup.

Page 11 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

So any questions on this point?

EN
On the Framework of

Interpretation? Kavouss, thank you.

IRAN:

Thank you, Jorge. Just for information of colleagues, I have
registered as a participant for the time being for that group. I
have asked for three groups, but one is this one. The other one
is jurisdiction. What -- I am suggesting that whatever work we
do should be not in the way that we are competing with that
group. Should be contributions or sometimes complementing
that and that would be very important. We would not like to
have two different outcomes, sometimes maybe -- maybe
contradicting. There might be a contradiction in the way that
they think of the issue. It is better if there are different views.
These different views we express in that group or be fed to that
group in order that the outcome of the group of Framework of
Interpretation would cover points of everybody. But not to have
two different views which may mislead the leaders. So maybe
we have to consider in the objective of this group that
contributions and in a complementary manner or whatever
manner to that group with a view not to have any competitions
and not to have any overlapping and not to have anything -contradictions to that output. This is very important. Thank
you.

Page 12 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

JORGE CANCIO:

EN

I think this point is very well noted and at least for our point of
view we are completely in agreement and this is the -- also the
meaning of this participation is to also act as a liaison in order to
-- to get the discussion which is ongoing there, to get the
relevant information here and to enrich the -- the point of view
and the -- and the possible inputs of our colleagues which may
actively participate in the CCWG accountability. But I think Mark
wanted to make a comment.

MARK CARVELL:

Yes, thank you, Jorge, and thank you, Kavouss. I think you're
hitting on an important functionality of the working group here
is that we can provide the channel for coherent and effective
inputs into the work of the subgroup and as you rightly say,
there are members of the GAC who have registered, like yourself,
either as active participants or observers. And so the working
group I think is an opportunity for the members to understand
how that work is progressing of the working group. We can
share reflections on the discussions which will be, as you say,
involving a lot of people and perhaps difficult to understand in
terms of the volume of contributions that might go into -- I
expect to go into that subgroup's activities. So I -- what I
anticipate is that the members and the leads that we might

Page 13 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

identify in the work plan 4 engagement in the CCWG subgroup
on human rights will convey back to the working group how that
work is progressing in terms of developing the Framework of
Interpretation and where, from -- in particular from a
governmental perspective and the perspective of the IGOs with
their deep expertise as well in this area, can inform and
contribute to the effectiveness of that subgroup's work. So
that's how I see us in this working group contributing in a very
efficient and effective way to the work of the subgroup and help
that work progress to formulating a coherent Framework of
Interpretation that takes full account of relevant and
international law and so on. So that's how I see it going forward.
And that's why we're looking really for colleagues in the working
group to help with that process, to when we next meet and also
intersessionally to convey, you know, this is how the work is
going, this is where we -- we see opportunities to contribute to
discussions deploying our expertise and knowledge and also our
network out to external experts as well. Thanks.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you very much, Mark. Very useful remarks. Wanawit, did
you have a comment?

Page 14 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

EN

I tried to put something in as well for I think on the page 1, if you
can go back to the page 1. I think you can, I think, ask to work
on the new WHOIS PDP on the GNSO as we -- because they're in
the requirement phase and I do see some of the points we
follow-up since the PDP on the translations and transliterations
that had been done and conclude that I think we could be about
to participate in that three, I think the task number three.
I would like to urge the GACs from the country that use the ASCII
types of the address theme to read the final report on
translation/transliteration because a summary is that that treaty
questions that the GNSO would like to give the answer first
whether it's required to translate into one language, which
means English. Is that mandatory to do?
Secondly, who bear the cost of that translation/transliterations?
And that the main issue, that the PDP process of
translation/transliteration did earlier than the -- now they call
new WHOIS PDP or whatever you like to call it.
But I think that's still the different point of view in the PDP
process. And (indiscernible) Thailand participate since the first
meeting of that PDP. So I agree it's important that we have to be
early engaged.
The most important thing is our point been taken into the PDP,
even though it's just a GAC Thailand, is not GAC consensus on

Page 15 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

that. But at least (indiscernible) so it will be documented and
it's there that we already have our opinion and we make our
point known even though the consensus is not go for
translation. Does that mean contact information inside the
WHOIS still be in the local language? That are the issues.
And that plenty of document need to read. And I think for the
GAC, I think we need to work in the teams. And a lot of issue I do
share the feeling you have is most like coming to the
(indiscernible) train that's running maybe 200 kilometers an
hour when you participate in. That are the part are difficult, but
I think you can start to engage.
And I think we have a core team that we can discuss and then
spread the work, that the most important thing is not meaning
that you have to follow every subjects. I cannot follow all. I just
only try to follow when they start to talk about this localization
language issues.
And it would be great if you have a team to support in the
working groups and then you just point out what are the subject
matter that you really focus that will help. So in that way we can
work together in the team. That what I feel. Thank you.

Page 16 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

JORGE CANCIO:

EN

Thank you very much, Wanawit. You may take this as your
intent to try to participate actively in Item Number 3. That's
very, very much appreciated.
I think we're having also a very interesting discussion on -- on
how to participate on this other also pressing issue of the
framework of interpretation in the CCWG accountability.
I -- before we go to Kavouss, I just wanted to mention that we
already have some active participants of the GAC within the
CCWG in general. I would like to urge colleagues to also sign up
for the subgroup on the framework of interpretation.

As

Wanawit said for the WHOIS work, it's very important to be there
from the beginning to engage with the community to
understand the other points of view to participate actively there.
That will really permit to develop a framework of interpretation
and when it comes to the chartering organizations, including the
GAC, will be understandable and acceptable to all.
So with this, I would like to ask you if there is already anyone
from you who is participating in the CCWG accountability who
would be willing to engage into the subgroup? And we have
Kavouss and then Milagros.

Page 17 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

IRAN:

EN

Thank you, Jorge. You refer to some part of what I wanted to
say.
In that group working -- cross-community working party, we,
means GAC, are one of the six chartering organizations finally
would comment on that. There are others who might have
different view on the issue. We have contracting members on
that, non-contracting members, registry, registrar. You have the
contractual, non-contractual, IPC, service provider, and many
things.

So our views may be reflecting the views of

governments. But in addition our views, should also be matched
or finally included in a way that we have a general view of
human rights and framework of interpretation which covers
viewpoints of everybody in a collective manner. So this should
be taken into account.
Other things is that from the topic point of view, jurisdiction and
human rights, there are two complex issues requires
considerable amount of background, background in order to
comment, background in order to actively participate at the
meeting.

Because in the activity of CCWG, we have three

categories of participations: Passive participations, listening
only. Then you have active participations, contributing. But
sometimes contributing should be the direction that is
consistent with the background issues understand the
discussions in order to have a more positive output.

Page 18 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

So the volunteer for that requires a lot of preparatory work at
home in order to be aware of what issue is discussed, what are
the things. There are considerable amount of information in
Work Stream 1. I suggest, perhaps, some of the colleagues may
wish also to look at those material which provide them some
preliminary information where we are, what were we discussing.
For instance, when we say "international conventions," which
international conventions?

There are many.

When we say

"human rights," what are the human rights? All of the things.
You have right to education. You have right to many things. You
have right to speech. You have right to free flow of information,
many other. So we have to be aware of all of those things in
order that be properly heard at the meeting and positively
contribute that we finally go to the convergence of the views.
Anything that I -- because of lack of knowledge, I'm talking
myself, diverting the discussion and so on and so forth may not
be welcome. So we have to be more prepared for that.
So this is a call for real homework before participation at the
one-hour or two-hour discussions. That is very, very important.
So material that Mark referred, for instance, is important to look
at those reports. This is one report. There are other reports as
well. If you or others have any information like that, please
kindly provide that. Post it somewhere and call the people to
look at that one. And if within that very long report, there are

Page 19 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

areas more important to focus. If you can identify, please kindly
identify for the benefit of the others. That is very important.
Thank you.

MARK CARVELL:

Yes, thank you very much. That exactly is the kind of function
that I see the working group performing, collating the relevant
materials and the knowledge and tapping into the expertise that
GAC members and IGO observers who are closely involved in
conventions -- relevant conventions and so on is very important.
I agree entirely. We will develop that functionality through the
working group and use of the Web site and our mail list.
Now I will turn to Milagros. Yes, thanks.

MILAGROS CASTANON:

First of all, Jorge and Mark, I'm very sorry because I was late, and
all of you as well.
And I wanted to go back to what Jorge just said and what
Kavouss said as well.

The framework of interpretation is

extremely important. It's very important that we all get involved
in this working group, this subgroup. And not only because of
the content -- the final contents of the framework of
interpretation but also because as far as I'm concerned, there's - there are a few questions that arise from the idea of a

Page 20 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

framework of interpretation, which I have already -- Peru has
already expressed through the comment period for the bylaws.
We don't know, for example, if this framework of interpretation
will have the same legal standing as the bylaws.

If it's a

framework of interpretation of the bylaws, it shouldn't have the
same legal standing.

So the bylaws require even more

importance. And it's also important to point out that to this
respect the bylaws as far as, for example, international law is
concerned are not well written.
They lack accuracy. I don't want to waste everybody's time with
my repeated comments. We have already posted them in the
Web site for commenting the bylaws.
We find them a little ambiguous, and I presume that this
ambiguity is one of the issues that will be taken care of through
the framework of interpretation.
Regarding what you just said, Kavouss, about conventions,
that's another error that has been made when describing the
extent or the -- (non-English word or phrase) -- of ICANN with
international law.
In this regard, the sources of international law which are -- one
of them are conventions. Only one of them. But, you see, it's

Page 21 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

not well written because either -- you cannot choose one from
the other.
I have made, on my own, a list of applicable laws known today. I
remember Suzanne Radell also insisted on knowing what were
the applicable laws, and I made it a point to research
surrounding this preoccupation of Suzanne, and there is a list
that I can share with you but it is not a conclusive list, not only
because there is not one complete binding framework,
international framework for the Internet, but also because there
is many -- there are many soft laws that are being taken into
account for the application of Internet in the lack of an
international framework, a legal framework.
And finally, addressing also one of your preoccupations,
Kavouss, another issue that we have raised is the evolving
nature of law. That is, this concept does not only apply to
international law, it applies to law -- it applies to national law,
but in this case I'm going to refer to the evolving nature of -notion of international law. That has to be included, because
this is a body of rules that will continue evolving and we cannot
make a conclusive list, even -- and even worse, when all the
sources of international law are not being pointed out.
Thank you.

Page 22 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

JORGE CANCIO:

EN

Thank you so much, Milagros.
I'm reminded that we have six minutes left and we still have to
cover some of the issues, so I think we cannot enter into
substantive discussion right now. We have to still cover a couple
of administrative issues.
I think that what Milagros was commenting on now are very
important substantive points which we need to engage with the
working -- with the work in the CCWG on the framework of
interpretation in order to make those points, to discuss it with
the rest of the community, to channel it into that work, as we
said before.
We would like to urge colleagues to focus on this item of the
work plan. As I said before, colleagues who are already a part of
the CCWG to consider signing up for this subgroup. Colleagues
who are still not members or participants in the CCWG but who
want to effectively contribute on this, that they consider to
participate here because it's open to everyone. And then I will
take a very short comment by Indonesia, but a very short one,
and then we will go over to the last points we have before we
have to wrap up. Thank you.

Page 23 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

INDONESIA:

EN

Thank you. Just very short comment that I agree that -- I fully
agree that international laws are so many and difficult to review
all of them.
Moreover, there are countries who follow some international
law, some don't follow it. Some agree with Budapest
convention, some doesn't agree. Some agree with WTOTIA or -ITA or some -- doesn't -What I think can be -- can be accommodated -- considered by
the working group is that how we can make bylaws.

We

certainly avoid to have collision or different approach with the
different regulation with the other international laws. Perhaps
the one that was presented yesterday for -- relating to
accreditation for operators related to law enforcement agencies
as presided by -- I forget -- during the law enforcement session
yesterday, I think we can consider to be followed.
For example, there are bylaws. If you follow it, you get one
credit. If you don't follow it, you get zero credit. 1,000 bylaws,
you follow many, you get better credit than if you cannot follow
them.
Whether you do not follow it because there are international
regulations that the country has to follow or local regulation
that the country also has to follow, but then the organization
have the -- its own bylaws, and if you follow the bylaws and --

Page 24 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

you get credit for that. Of course the bylaws have to be -- have
to be reviewed, you know, on a timely basis.
But that's an approach that might be useful to be considered in
the working group. Thank you.

JORGE CANCIO:

Okay. Thank you very much. That is noted.
And it also gives me a segue to one point we had on the agenda,
which is the liaison activity with the public safety working group.
According to our terms of reference, we should coordinate with
them. If you don't disagree, we will take this over as co-chairs,
as it was included in the -- in the work plan. So this will be, then,
accordingly.
And while we haven't had time, really, to discuss the issue of the
invitation of IGOs to making inputs, but we make call to
observers present in the room and in the meeting from IGOs to
approach us if they think they can make relevant inputs to these
lines of work of this working group and we could then try to
come up -- come back with proposals to the working group
before Hyderabad. Right?
And the last point we had is again to remind you that we are all
invited for the joint session of the CCWP on corporate social

Page 25 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

responsibility and human rights in ICANN and our working group
tomorrow at 15 -- 15 hours in the room Veranda 1.
And the CCWP, as you know from previous meetings, is doing
very significant efforts and work on related topics, and it would
be very interesting to have as many of you as possible in that
meeting in order to share in the -- this common interest
explained by Kavouss repeated times that we all converge and
share our points of view and we don't engage into parallel
efforts but we try to converge on cross-community efforts in this
regard.
With this, I would give the floor to Mark or Milagros, if you want
to conclude the meeting.

MARK CARVELL:

Thank you, Jorge.
Well, yes, we -- our time is up so we will have to conclude, but
just to underline, there's the opportunity to meet again with the
CCWP, and also to underline the opportunity to register your
interest with the CCWG accountability subgroup on human
rights. If you go to the CCWG page, you can then register your
interest and join the discussions of the subgroup on human
rights as they now launch, and I'm sure there's going to be quite
a lot of substantive work between now and Hyderabad.

Page 26 of 27

HELSINKI – GAC Human Rights and International Law Working Group Meeting

EN

Okay. And look again at the opportunities to volunteer to report
back from the PDP processes.
My thanks also to Wanawit for stepping forward on new registry
services work. That's very helpful.
Okay. So I'll finish there.
Milagros, did you want to conclude as the co-chair, with a
comment? No?
Okay. Well, thanks very much, everybody, for attending. Thanks
for your inputs. Look forward to working with you in the future.
Okay. We'll conclude the working group meeting there, and
thanks very much again. Thank you.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 27 of 27

