HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 10:45 to 11:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

It is 10:45. This is the RSSAC Public Session in Helsinki Hall.

BRAD VERD:

We’re just waiting for our official star time. All right. Let’s get
going.
I’m Brad Verd, co-Chair of the RSSAC Committee. To my left here
is Tripti. We’re going to give you bunch of updates today but I’m
going to give it to Tripti first who will start off and then I’ll jump
in later.

TRIPTI SINHA:

Good morning. I’m Tripti Sinha, co-Chair of RSSAC and I’ll start
with a very quick and brief overview of RSSAC and our activities.
I’ll start with the overview, turn it over to Duane who will give
you an update on some current work that we’re doing with
regard to metrics, and then over to Brad who will give you an
update on workshops that the RSSAC conducts. And then I’ll
conclude with some other current work that’s happening and
then any questions that you may have.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

Next slide please. Next slide.
So, the RSSAC is essentially an Advisory Committee that was
assembled some years ago to advice the RSSAC Board. We have
a very well-defined scope and it is essentially to advice the
ICANN community and the Board on matters regarding the
operation, administration, security, and the integrity of the
Internet’s Root Service System. So it’s a very tightly and well
defined scope. Moving on.
It’s comprised of members of all the 12 operators who operate
the different root servers and we have primary representatives
as well as alternates and liaisons. I like to pause here and those
of you who are members of RSSAC in the audience, if you could
please stand and identify yourselves. Okay. So these are
members of RSSAC. Thank you very much.
The RSSAC also looks at an extension of itself. This body that we
rely on to do lots of work and these are the volunteer
organizations, they’re subject matter experts on DNS-related
items and they are appointed by the RSSAC.
This membership group, the Caucus, consists of currently 74
technical experts and 47%, roughly half of them are not from the
root server operator organizations and they submit a public
statement of interest and they do get credit for the work they do
in the documents that are published.

Page 2 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

The purpose is to bring together this community of experts who
have broad expertise and broad spectrum of skillsets and there’s
transparency on who does what and we try to bring various
degrees of opinions and skills to the table. We define work.
There deadlines associated with the work, we scope it and
there’s a deliverable.
We welcome memberships so please send an e-mail to rssacmembership@icann.org and submit a statement of interest and
your background and the Membership Committee will look into
it, will consider your membership to the Caucus.
Our next meeting will be at the ITF meeting in Berlin on the 17th
of July and this was decided at the Yokohama meeting when the
ITF met there, that we would like to meet at every alternate ITF
meeting. The next one is in Berlin.
We’ve done two recent works that we’d like to talk about. Duane
is going go into details on RSSAC’s 002 and this is measurement
document that talks about metrics that the operators look at.
We also run what’s called workshops and this is highly
concentrated time when we look at topics that delve into and do
a deeper dive, typically of an evolutionary nature. We have two
such workshops and we just published our report on the second
workshop. It was released on the 22nd of June, just a few days
ago.

Page 3 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

I’m going to turn it over to Duane Wessels who’ll give you an
update on RSSAC 002 version.

DUANE WESSELS:

Thanks, Tripti. So, yeah. This is the third revision of RSSAC 002
which describes measurements that each of our operators
should make and publish. This helps meet one of the
requirements of the service expectations. It provides important
data for the ongoing expansion of the root zone.
A lot of these updates in version 3 were based on experience that
people had gained in implementing the measurements on their
own services and there’s also some clarifications in the
document regarding its scope.
This is the list of measurements defined by RSSAC 002. This list
has basically not changed since version 1, so it’s these six
metrics. And if you go to the next slide, I’ll describe what some of
the changes are.
One of those metrics was to calculate latency and distribution of
the root zone and previously that is something that each root
server was asked to do and it was agreed that didn’t perhaps –
oh I’m sorry, I’m confusing things here. The latency calculation is
still something that every letter is doing but the method of that
calculation has been changed to a strict 95th percentile.

Page 4 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

Previously it was something a little bit more confusing so that’s
the change there.
The zone size is also something that previously every operator
was doing and going forward now, this is something that will be
reported only by the Root Zone Maintainer. It was decided that it
make sense for only the Root Zone Maintainer to do that.
A lot of the changes had to do with clarifying that when
measurements are taken on responses that it should only be
responses from the server. It turns out that root servers from
time to time receive DNS responses sent to them which really
should not be happening but for whatever reason that does
happen. So that clarification was made for a couple of the
metrics. We clarified some of the reasons for including responses
in the traffic volume metric and also explained why it may be the
case that response volumes maybe a little bit different than
query volumes in certain situations.
Since we changed the meaning of some these metrics, we now
felt that necessary to add a version number to the YAML
documents that are output from our RSSAC 002 so that the
consumer of the data can tell which version of the spec it was
based on.

Page 5 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

And lastly, we added sort of a naming scheme that would allow
operators to include their own custom metrics should they so
choose.
Here is a table of the implementation status so far. We have data
from 10 of the 13 letters so far and three of them still coming
soon. So if you’re interested in this data, you can go to the
rootservers.org webpage and down at the bottom you see an
area where each Root Server Operator is listed. And if you click
on their letter and then look for the box that’s highlighted there
in red, there would be a button that says “RSSAC” and clicking
on that will take you their metric’s page.

BRAD VERD:

Duane.

DUANE WESSELS:

Yeah.

BRAD VERD:

Really quick. Just to clarify, it’s root-servers.org. It’s not to send
you to a different place. The webpage is root-servers.org.

Page 6 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

DUANE WESSELS:

EN

Sorry. Yeah. Okay. Well I need to go to another meeting. Can we
take questions on this now if anyone has questions so that I can
skip out?

BRAD VERD:

Are there any questions around the update to 002 version 3 and
metrics? No? Thank you, Duane.

DUANE WESSELS:

Thanks.

BRAD VERD:

All right. Workshop. So as Tripti stated, we occasionally like to
lock everybody in a room together, all the RSSAC, the formal
committee and we don’t let them out until we get a number of
agenda items done. We just completed back in May our second
workshop and I’m going to run through what transpired and
what some of the action items or actions that we are taking from
that workshop.
I will add that this is a workshop report. This is not formal advice
that was given to the Board. This is just a report of the
discussions that took place in the workshop between the RSSAC
Committee members, so just to make that very clear.

Page 7 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

Workshop 2 we had back in May and we got everybody together
and locked them in a room for a couple of days. We had a very
full agenda. Most of it was based on output from our Workshop 1
that happened last year. Again, both Workshop 1 and Workshop
2 reports are on the RSSAC webpage so feel free to go there to
get the details from 1 and 2.
Obviously, we formed a planning committee, worked up the
agenda. One of the things we did learn from this workshop is
that two days isn’t enough so I think we’re expanding the future
workshops to three.
Next slide please.
Here are the topics that we broke. We broke them up into three
buckets: architecture, evolution, and reinventing RSSAC. I’ll
cover each one of these in a bit of detail here.
Next slide please.
Architecture – we had a number of different questions that fell in
this category. First and foremost is the DNS Root Servers and
how reliable it’s been over the years and the question has been
raised, does the failure of any single operator pose any threat to
the system as a whole?
We, the formal committee, worked up a – we identified a work
party. Work is currently underway on this document. Again, the

Page 8 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

workshop report is not the formal advice to the Board. Any of the
output would be.
The formal committee again created this work party to start this
document. It’s well underway and it is going to be – if we were
working on it – now, in the near future and it should be going to
the Caucus shortly for review.
Next slide.
Continuing in the architecture bucket – another question that
has been raised that we want to talk through as a group is the
benefits of adding or removing authoritative name servers from
the root zone. The consensus in the room was that there was no
technical need for more root zone authoritative name servers.
And we did rephrase this as a different question that is being
written up as a statement of work and being sent to the Caucus
and that was more around latency from the client to the Root
Zone Servers and what is acceptable latency?
Next slide please.
Again, you can see architecture filled a lot of our time in this
workshop. This discussion was around the commitment of all
the Root Server Operators. There is a statement that is nearing
completion. We plan to have it published on Thursday in which
all the operators commit to serving the IANA Root, and again

Page 9 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

that should be coming out here very shortly and we can make
this very formal.
All right, next bucket, the evolution. This one was around the
technical metrics that define the expectations around a Root
Server Operator. We formed, again, another work party out of
the formal committee. Work is well underway on this document
to find the technical expectations. I should say more detailed
technical expectations, something that will fill in, really
strengthen what is already in RSSAC 001 and we’re raising the
bar or defining what that bar should be out of this work party. So
that is currently underway and we will be going to the Caucus
shortly.
Next slide.
The last topic around reinventing RSSAC. Historically, there’s
been a bit of confusion between RSSAC and root server
operations. RSSAC – again, you saw in the beginning of this
meeting – our scope is very narrow, it’s very well defined and
there’s always a number of questions around root server
operations which is really not in the role or the purview of
RSSAC. But we thought it was important that RSSAC take on that
gap that was missing between the ICANN Board and the
community and the Root Server Operators.

Page 10 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

So we’ve all agreed to be the window into root server
operations, so if there are questions or concerns about the
service, bring them to RSSAC and we will track down the right
group or organization to answer it. If you have questions around
specific letters and don’t know how to reach them, please come
to RSSAC. We will point you in the right direction and get you to
the people you need to get answers to your questions.
But this was something that very vague in the past that
hopefully by making this, by memorializing this and formalizing
this that we can alleviate some that confusion going forward. All
right.

TRIPTI SINHA:

Thank, Brad. So just a slide or two on the current work that the
RSSAC is working on.
Next slide please.
This actually goes back to Workshop 1, so that was the first of
the current two workshops that we’ve had and future ones that
are coming in. We decided to look at just the history of the Root
Server System. The RSSAC got together, put together some very
good content that’s come together as very nice document and it
talks about the chronology of the system right back to how it
organically grew to what it is today and it describes the history

Page 11 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

of each of the different organizations and how they formed this
collective group that offers this service. So the document is in its
final stages and we should be publishing it soon.
Next slide.
This is currently a Caucus work party that is looking at how we
actually name the root service themselves and the entire system
has evolved over time. So we’re looking taking a step back and
looking at what is appropriate and what should be the path
going forward. That work is also very close to completion and a
report should be published soon.
This was work that’s been driven by a Caucus work party. This is
an example of how we use the Caucus and the previous
document that I talked about was driven by the RSSAC itself.
Next slide. Next slide.
I believe that brings us to the very last slide which still is points
us to our information page which is our main page on the ICANN
website and the first URL points to that. The second takes you to
where our publications live. And if you’d like to join the RSSAC
Caucus,

please

send

an

e-mail

to

the

rrsac-

membership@icann.org and submit a statement of interest and
your background and it’ll come into consideration.

Page 12 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

I believe that is the last slide. With that I open the floor for
questions.

BRAD VERD:

Any questions?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible] from India. My question is – I am new to this meeting
–there are 12 operator, 13 root servers, long back history. Is
there any option to give the 13 operator to create and give the
chance to 13 [A and G] run by the Verisign? So anyone can be
given to any organization in anywhere in the world?

BRAD VERD:

As I stated, the workshop that RSSAC held started to ask a
number of these different questions and the output from
Workshop 1 stated that there needs to be a defined process for
identifying potential Root Server Operators, and there isn’t one
today, and that RSSAC should be part of the yet to be the
determined process. Leading into that I think you have to define
a bunch of steps getting up to it, which is some of those things
that I covered of like defining how tall the bar is or how high the
bar is for a potential Root Server Operator.

Page 13 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

The other question that was asked about: do we need more
delegations in the NSSET? That was another question that was
asked and all of those are work is work and topics that I think
need to be answered well in advance of any changes to the
current delegation set.
So I think we’re on the track, we’re making progress but this is
something that we want to be very diligent about, very safe, be
to not disrupt those security and instability and resiliency of the
Internet or the root and I think we’re starting to ask those very
tough questions and address them. To answer your questions
specifically, we don’t have an answer for you right now because
like I said, we’ve got to answer all these other questions first.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

This [Davie] from Beijing Internet Institute. Firstly, I want to
thank for all you effort and work to make the RSSAC and to be
more transparent and more involvement, engagement for the
people.
And secondly, I would also like to ask a question, maybe a
difficult question that as you mentioned, the one slide said that
there’s no technical need for adding more assertive servers just
as the former questions. I saw the process is that you, the group
of people, I mean the operator setup workshop. The people in
the room at this side, there is no technical need but there’s not

Page 14 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

broadened consensus. And if there is other more public sessions
like this one and people can express really their comments on
some issues like that, I think there will be more transparency
and more [inaudible] for the community.

BRAD VERD:

I would add, actually I’d go one step further and say that rather
than just providing comments which are always welcome, you
can join the Caucus and be part of the work. That is coming up
with these answers to these very tough questions. That would be
my recommendation.

TRIPTI SINHA:

To add, from the workshop we came up with numerous
statements of work which are going to be investigating these
problems further. The report was just published and you should
probably read that if you haven’t already.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Yes. Thank you. Additional notes, I’m already joined the Caucus
and I pay much attention to the activities. So I hope that there
are more activities and more discussions are public and involve
more diversities, right?

Page 15 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

TRIPTI SINHA:

Absolutely. Yeah.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Thank you.

BRAD VERD:

Suzanne, do you want to add…? Suzanne is a member of the
RSSAC and I think she wants to add some commentary.

SUZANNE WOOLF:

Yeah, if you don’t mind. The thing that I would add in support of
my colleagues here, I’ve served as RSSAC liaison to the ICANN
Board and I’ve been in a bunch of roles in the community for a
long time so I’ve seen this question evolving over a very long
period of time now. And I think the important thing to recall
about RSSAC and the RSSAC perspective is that RSSAC’s remit is
technical so that’s why RSSAC is taking primarily a technical
view on these components of answering this question.
In the larger sense, I believe that it’s a community-wide set of
questions. RSSAC can provide a technical perspective and
operational perspective to answering it but I believe that part of
what we’re here is to say is that it’s a larger set of questions that
requires a wider community discussion that I think everyone
should be prepared to be part of.

Page 16 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

BRAD VERD:

Thank you, Suzanne.

NING KONG:

Hi! My name is Ning. I come from CNNIC. First I want to share one
information. CNNIC maintain IFG our root mirror. Just one days
ago, last Sunday in Beijing, we found that our mirror had been
hacked by the DDoS and each mirror have been tagged – the
volume is more than 10 gigabytes and the time lasted for two
hours. So my first question in that for other mirror maintainers,
do you have the same DDoS attack in the same time or not?

BRAD VERD:

Again, these are very operational questions and not RSSACspecific. This goes to the topic I talked about earlier that there’s
a lot of confusion between root operations and RSSAC and our
remit here.
That’s all right. I’d call that out. I’d say that if you want to have
an operational discussion with some of the root operators, I’m
sure they’d be happy to have a discussion with you but probably
we shouldn’t do it here.

Page 17 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

NING KONG:

EN

Okay. Yeah. I’m sorry. So my second question that, is there any
other mailing list or platform that we can share such kind of
operational information not within the RSSAC? Is there any
other…?

BRAD VERD:

Where we agreed to be the window into root operations if there
are questions, I will say that there was an attack. The root
operators are working on a statement and should have that out
on their public webpage, root-servers.org, in the next couple of
days with the details around what took place a couple of days
ago.

NING KONG:

Yeah. Okay. Thank you. And my last question. My last question is
about that if I found some kind of new things maybe we should
be researched, how can I raise the issue? For example, if I think
maybe it make sense that we research maybe we can optimize
the physical placement of the root mirror in [word], so how can I
[raise] the issues? And is there some channel?

TRIPTI SINHA:

Go ahead. First, are you a member of Caucus? If you’re not, I
highly encourage you to become a member of Caucus.

Page 18 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

NING KONG:

Okay, yeah.

TRIPTI SINHA:

And then go ahead and forward your questions to us because
the RSSAC is contained in the Caucus and we will take that
under advisement.

BRAD VERD:

I will add that, your question is already underway. The work is
currently underway and being sent to the Caucus here very
shortly.
I will add that, when you have questions or you wanted to
research on something, one of the topics at the Caucus meeting
that is being scheduled in Berlin next month is what are the
things that RSSAC and the Caucus should be looking at and
that’ll be one of the topics that you bring up new ideas and we
talk them through and identify work going forward. Again, going
back to the Caucus, that is the conduit end.

NING KONG:

Page 19 of 24

So the Caucus meeting provide remote attend?

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

BRAD VERD:

Yes.

NING KONG:

Okay. Thank you.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible] from [NICC]. This is related to the measurement tool
in the presentation. I observed three operators have not
published their data they are collecting. Do we have some time
frame by when they will be publishing those data?

TRIPTI SINHA:

It was on the slide.

BRAD VERD:

It was on the slide.

TRIPTI SINHA:

Thank you for scrolling back. You see F and G – F is Q4 of 2016, G
is Q3 and I is Q3.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Page 20 of 24

Okay. Thank you.

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

EN

TRIPTI SINHA:

Yup.

WES HARDAKER:

Hi! Wes Hardaker. Just for me, purely I’m a scientific kind of
person, more data is good so if anybody wants to do an
evaluation of any sort of numbers in the world, regardless of
whether it’s more root letter or whatever, nobody’s going to turn
down that information and the Caucus is sort of the right place
to join and to become a part of it.
A couple of realizations though. One, members of the Caucus
can propose work and one of the things that there has to be
agreement among everybody that that work should be done,
but anybody can propose work that’s in the Caucus. But more
importantly, remember that RSSAC is an advisory [pottery]. We
do not produce. This is the way the world’s going to work. We do
not state new policy. All we do in RRSAC is advice the Board and
advice the ICANN community. We don’t make rules. We don’t
make regulations. All we do is produce technical stuff and that
technical body of work is done inside the Caucus. So that’s
absolutely the right place for a lot of these questions to get
answered.

Page 21 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

EN

Sorry. [Davie] again. I found that there are some missing parties
that [inaudible] as RSSAC can also as a Caucus. The expert
should demonstrate to [do] some technical fact, right? And also
give some documents, some important information and to be
public.
I found there’s missing party that there’s no policy developing
part for them put there some topics. [Really there’s not only]
technical needs but there’s also the need non-publicly. So is
there any trained or any are working on for the policy
developing right to the root server operation?

TRIPTI SINHA:

So you’re saying we’re currently technically focused. Is there a
possibility of us articulating policy?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Yeah.

TRIPTI SINHA:

So you are correct. We are purely advisory in nature and
advisory from a technical angle. We’ll take that as input and see
what we can do with it. But right now we are restricted to being
an advisory body.

Page 22 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

EN

Yeah. I ask this question because we noticed that there are
technical discussions on the root zone increment, right?

TRIPTI SINHA:

Correct.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

We need to add more TLDs for example, it’s a very hot topic in
[inaudible]. There’s no technical need for that. Actually, for the
[inaudible] but it’s the policy requirement. Just as a background
for my question. Thank you.

BRAD VERD:

I think just going to add on a bit, I think any of the policy
decisions that might be done in the future would rely on a good
foundation, a good technical foundation which I think it is
imperative upon us to make sure exists before policy is
implemented and that is what we’re trying to accomplish right
now.
Any further questions?

TRIPTI SINHA:

Well, thank you for attending. Feel free to reach out to Brad or to
me or any member of RSSAC. I think you know who they are.
Thank you very much.

Page 23 of 24

HELSINKI – RSSAC Public Session

BRAD VERD:

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 24 of 24

Again, thank you.

EN

