HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 10:45 to 12:00 EEST
ICANN 56 | Helsinki, Finland

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thank you, all, everyone. Good morning, good afternoon,
and good evening to any remote participants. My name is Dev
Anand Teelucksingh, Chair of the At-Large Outreach and
Engagement Subcommittee meeting.
We have a packed agenda for this session. We’ll be looking at the
ICANN stakeholder analysis tool that the Outreach and
Engagement Subcommittee has been working on. We’ll be
having a discussion of the ICANN Fellowship Program. The
Fellowship Program process is now out for public comment. We
have some initial ideas to share. And we will then be discussing
the outreach activities for ICANN 57, which is now in Hyderabad,
India.
Because we’ve been doing outreach sessions for ICANN 56,
Helsinki and for the Marrakesh meeting, which was ICANN 55, we
want to start kicking off what we want to do for Hyderabad,
India. Given that we now know the venue – it’s been definitely
moved from Puerto Rico – now that uncertainty is over, and now

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

we can really start planning in earnest for that. And any other
business.
We have some slides here. Just to introduce for those
newcomers – and welcome – next slide. To introduce the
Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee, our purpose is to
reach out to new potential members of the At-Large community,
which is outreach, and to engage new and existing members of
the At-Large community, which is engagement, to be able to
continue to fulfill At-Large’s role in ICANN activities, representing
the interests of Internet end users in ICANN activities. So we will
be working with the At-Large community, the RALOs, to ensure
such strategies are implemented.
Anyone interested is welcome to join this working group. The
staff e-mail address is there, or you could approach myself or
any of the co-Chairs of the Outreach and Engagement
Subcommittee. I have two of them right here, Maureen Hilyard
on my right, and Daniel Nanghaka on my left. Right now, two of
the representatives are Glenn McKnight and Olivier CrepinLeblond, who are the other co-Chairs. It’s one from each region.
Ah, sorry. I didn’t see – Glenn is also here. There you go. Thank
you. All right. I still didn’t see Olivier.
All right. Next slide. We’re not going to go into the detailed
history of the subcommittee and so forth. These are just links

Page 2 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

that people can go and review. Our wiki page, the work that’s
being done by the subcommittee, the various documents that
were done, and some information regarding one of the
programs that’s used for outreach, which is the Community
Regional Outreach Pilot Program, or CROPP. What that is, it’s a
program where persons are sent to events for outreach
purposes.
Okay. Well, next slide. What we’re going to present here is what I
call the ICANN stakeholder analysis tool. This first started out as
a Fellowship analysis tool. We realized that, if we wanted to
target the Fellows for outreach purposes, there was no one
place where those persons could be searched for.
So one of the things we did – next slide – was that Glenn actually
started it off by – did a spreadsheet and showed the breakdown
of the Fellowship. What I’ve been doing is to try to improve on
this. We did a second version in time for ICANN 55, where we
were able to search by country or by region and take into
account the different geographic names between ICANN and ISO
and various communities in ICANN.
One of the challenges that we want to find and which we’re
trying to solve is that often, in the ICANN community of multiple
stakeholders, it’s very hard to find out who they are or how
many they are. This has actually been a very large challenge,

Page 3 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

because if you wanted to find a person in a particular country,
there was really no place that has that information.
So the tool has now been evolving, and [inaudible] – well the
[2.0] version of this tool. What we’ve managed to was to be able
to track the stakeholders in the Fellowship, GAC, and the ccNSO,
either by country or by region. What we’re going to do now is
there’s a link there that persons can click on and launch the tool,
but we’ll probably just have staff share their screens so you can
just walk through how the tool works. While staff is going to do
its magic to get the screen up, just scroll down the screen there.
You’ll see the link to launch the spreadsheet. Lovely.
Okay. Anyone have any quick comments or questions before this
sheet comes up? I’m just looking around the room here. Okay.
No?
All right. When I do see the – ah, Tijani. Please go ahead.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Thank you. Thank you, Glenn, for this effort. I think it is
important. The most difficult thing to do is to have them by
stakeholder because people don’t know. They come here and
they are at the same time from the universities and civil society.
So when they come here, they don’t know to which constituency
they may be. This is the main information we want at the end. So

Page 4 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

I think that the effort is very good, and perhaps we may put
several possibilities for the stakeholder. Since he’s an academic,
we can put academic. He’s also civil society. We put civil society,
so that we know where we can go and catch some people to
bring them here.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Tijani. Indeed, that’s one of the concerns we had,
because it was very hard to find this information. That’s why we
started doing this collection effort. Then we started thinking,
“You know what? We really need to track the stakeholders in a
country or region.”
Okay. Well, it’s up on the screen now, although it probably needs
to scroll to the right, or just the size of the font a little bit. Okay.
What we do on the right-hand side in the colored box, we could
select the country to find stakeholders. If we click on the cell –
the H1 cell there – for the country, it’s a drop-down for all of the
countries. If you were to pick, say, Argentina, and – all right. So
what happens then is that, on the left side, you see all of the
Fellows that have ever applied in ICANN’s history since the
Fellowship was first created in 2007. You can scroll down, see
the names, and, when possible, we’ve noted the type of what
the Fellow itself identified themselves as. Now we can look at a
particular country, see how many of those Fellows there are, and

Page 5 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

then analyze whether they active. Are there ones that aren’t
active? Maybe there’s a reason why. Maybe we can reach out to
those persons.
If you scroll back up and scroll to the right again – okay. We can
also see who the GAC representative is and whether they have
membership in the ccNSO. What I’ve also done was that the link
there next to the GAC representative, if you click on that – yeah,
go ahead and click and open the next tab; yeah; yeah, go ahead
and click on that – you’ll then go to the GAC’s website. And then
you would see the contact details for that person, for all persons
in Argentina in this example. So it’s linked to the most up-todate contact information on the GAC’s website and on the
ccNSO’s website.
What we can then do, if you are looking for possible synergies,
and one of the things that At-Large – well, given that we
represent the interests of Internet end users in ICANN activities, I
think one important local activity is the ccTLD. Maureen, as the
ccNSO liaison – one of the great concerns that we know we want
to encourage is for the ALSes is to interact with the ccNSO and
be able to give input to any of that ccTLD’s policies of how their
country code is being used. So now we can now look at the
ccNSO and ensure that, if there’s an At-Large Structure in that
country, they know how to contact that person.

Page 6 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

What we’ve also done is things like our regional dashboards. We
can now do analyses of countries that have ALSes but that don’t
have membership in the ccNSO, or vice versa. So if there are no
At-Large Structures in a country or territory, but they do have
stakeholders in the GAC and in the ccNSO, we can then reach out
to those persons and then make inquiries. Are there
organizations in your country? Any individuals interested in local
Internet governance issues? And start that dialogue to see – if
you find those individuals, reach out to those individuals, and
begin a conversation of why you should become involved in AtLarge and other opportunities, such as the Fellowship and
NextGen, if the ICANN meeting is in their region, and so forth.
Going back to the spreadsheet too, what we’ve also done is
we’re able to now track the changes to the site. Well, perhaps if
you could just click on the “Sheet” tab of ccNSO, for example,
just as a – yeah, at the bottom.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

It’s the bottom. Yeah.

DEV ANAND TEELICKSINGH: Yeah. That. Thank you. What happens is that the information is
pulled automatically from the ccNSO’s website. What I’ve done
is I can now track whenever changes happen to the ccNSO site.

Page 7 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

Therefore, I can update the spreadsheet accordingly. So it’s a
little bit more automated way of keeping up to date with any
changes in the GAC and in the ccNSO, as opposed to just
manually trying to find that information out.
Okay. Well, I think I could stop there and just raise the floor for
questions. Glenn?

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

We leave it really open for you to do your own analysis, but some
of the things that strike you is certain countries are
underrepresented, in terms of small island states and certain
areas that were never part of the Fellowship Program, such as
Australia, North America, or Western Europe. There are some
gaps here, and you can see some of the gaps that some people
have not self-identified, or they use terms like “academic,”
which could be civil society. There is some lack of consistency.
We didn’t make these terms. When I started doing this database,
I took the 900 names or so and I had to manually do it. None of
this stuff was done. But we felt, as outreach and engagement,
what a natural group. The Newcomers, the NextGen, and the
Fellows were all potential members of our RALOs. So not
particularly in my case in NARALO, but all of them were potential
people that we need to reach out to and get to know. But we
need to know who we’re dealing with.

Page 8 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

One of the things you’ll see in this is that a number of people
have come back more than once. There’s a definite pattern here
that people who’ve come more than once, they went from one
meeting to a second or third and even fourth time, they went
from just a marginal person to someone who became a mentor.
Some of these people – some of them are in this room here –
became leaders, and very good leaders, within the RALO
constituency.
The other thing that I did, which is not here, is I started to look at
the Fellowships that ISOC did with their Ambassador Program. I
also looked at the RIR Ambassadorships. There’s a lot of
commonality, including IEFT. There is individuals who,
particularly in the technical community, that have gotten
Fellowships on each of them. So it’s not to say they’re serial
Fellowship people, but these are really committed individuals.
From outreach and engagement, you can cast a net or you can
use a fishing rod. So my analysis was, rather than get huge
numbers, but focus on individuals which have shown
themselves to be very interested in the process and a wide
process. One of the things we’re doing today is we’re
photographing every Fellow and giving them a brochure about
the Social Media Working Group. We really want to encourage
them to say, “Hey. We exist.”

Page 9 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

I think in terms of the analysis, a lot of these people from the end
user community tend to seem to go more to NCUC, rather than
us. You have to ask yourself, why that is the case? Are we doing a
good enough job on outreach? Are we not appealing to them?
When we’re working with them one-on-one, they really are
interested in us, but I don’t think we’ve done a good enough job
on outreach and engagement. Maybe we need to wine and dine
them. I’m not sure. I don’t know the answer to it, but I just think
from the analysis, we did score a number of great people. But we
could do better.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Glenn. There’s a queue here. Seun, and then Tijani.

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Thank you very much. I have a couple comments, but first I want
to thank Dev and Glenn for this wonderful spreadsheet. I’m sure
it must have taken quite a lot of time to put this up, especially
using Google platform.
I just want to ask the Fellows count, because I notice that there
are some Fellows who have actually returned but were not
recorded. There are some Fellows who have returned and were
recorded. I wanted to know, are you just recording the Fellows’
first instance? Or once you take record of the recurrence – and

Page 10 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

did you get this information from the Fellows staff team directly?
It may be good to have a pattern on that.
The other thing I wanted to say, is there any particular reason
why we are focusing on the GAC and the ccNSO? I think it would
be very good thing to actually bring in the [inaudible] or sort in
by type. The type are in the cells, but if you can have it as just
like we have the country. And perhaps we can stick with the
type, the categorization that ICANN is using on our nametags.
Finally, which I think is perhaps the most important of at least
my point, this work will continue to grow, and I think it should
become too much work to be done by volunteers. I think this is a
very good initiative that should be taken at the global level by
staff. If we can perhaps – I don’t know what the process is,
whether we can send a recommendation or something – request
that we have this central source of information to actually make
use of. [inaudible] Google I’m sure because Google right now is
real-time. One person selects Nigeria. You see the person
selecting Nigeria. So it should be more independent and globally
[inaudible] so that everybody can use it and then follow up.
Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Seun. Quite a few comments there. Just to try to answer
some of them, I believe that ICANN is probably working on such

Page 11 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

a tool, but the thing is, we felt we needed the information now to
really try to do outreach and engagement. If we were to wait and
wait, it might take some time.
I know that the geographic regions report – and this is
something that actually I’ve noted in the sheets – that the
different communities actually use different country names to
represent the same country or territory. That makes life quite
difficult. So I had to do a lot of harmonization in the sheets. If
you go into the sub-sheets with [inaudible], you could probably
see what I had to do to get it normalized across all the groupings
in the GAC and ccNSO and Fellows.
To answer the first question regarding the Fellowship, we are
tracking how many opportunities were Fellowships given to
persons in that territory. So it does count whether a person has
appeared five times or whatever. And it shows when they
attended. We collected that information straight from the
Fellowship announcements, which were scattered from the
ICANN announcements all the way back to ICANN – I can’t
remember the number now – in 2007, when in Puerto Rico. So,
again, it was a lot of effort to just do it. Glenn added, as I say,
brute force. Cut-and-paste, copy-paste, copy-paste. Yes, and it
was a lot of energy and some tries to get it right.

Page 12 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

One example is I that I had to copy all the GAC contact details.
After a very sore wrist, I then realized, “You know what? This is
probably not the way to do it.” I had to delete it and then work
out a way to get the link to the GAC’s website to update it so that
you can have up-to-date contact details.
Why are we focusing on GAC and ccNSO? I think it’s because
those are prominent stakeholder communities in ICANN. Again,
from the ccNSO side of things, one way of increasing At-Large
engagement is for At-Large Structures in the region to start
thinking about ccTLD use, in terms of how they want their ccTLD
to make available domain names under the ccTLD, under the
second level or third level or whatever. I think one of the key
things for any At-Large Structure is for them to start caring about
local issues first, and then you can then care about global issues.
Because if you don’t care about things happening to you locally,
it’s going to be very, very hard to care globally. So that’s why we
focus a lot on the ccNSO side of things, because there’s
opportunity for interaction.
What we’re thinking of doing to expand this is also to start
tracking the NextGen persons, and that’s probably the next
version of this.
Finally, regarding the type of Fellows – and this is a problem on
the Fellowship side of things – apparently the Fellows, when

Page 13 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

they applied, they self-identified, and in some cases they did not
identify. So that’s a challenge. Another challenge has been that
different terms are used throughout in terms of spelling. Some
say “civil society,” some say “government,” and some use the
abbreviation “govt.” So all of that has to now be normalized,
and that exercise hasn’t started yet. But we’re accepting
volunteers to help work on that.
Tijani?

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Thank you very much, Dev. Again, I would like to thank Glenn for
this work. I agree with him that we have to focus on what is
useful for us as engagement and outreach. Of course, we can
make use of this tool for other things, such as collaboration or
coordination with the ccTLDs. This is a very good thing. But our
main work is to make outreach and engagement, and we need
clear information about people from where they are coming. We
have to focus on the countries so that we – don’t forget that we
have a strategy objective in At-Large: to have at least one ALS
per country. So we have to focus on the countries and go to
people who are coming from countries where we don’t have yet
ALSes. And also their background: academic, civil society, etc.
Why are they going to the NSCG and not coming to us? Because
we are not doing our job. I recognize that I am not doing my job.

Page 14 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

During the ICANN meetings, I am always in the meeting rooms,
which is wrong. We have to go to them. We have to talk to them.
We have to drag them and make them come to us. Yes, you
understand what I mean?
I think this must be an objective of this subcommittee, to work
with those newcomers and to make them come to At-Large. We
need them, especially from countries where we don’t have
ALSes. Yes, there are some countries where you don’t have
Fellows because they’re not developing countries. These are the
rules of the Fellowship. But it doesn’t matter. We have to try to
have one ALS per country. This is an objective. Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Tijani. I didn’t actually show one of the other tabs,
which is the search by region. Actually, if you can go to the
second sheet tab in the spreadsheet. Yeah.
To answer the other question, Tijani, indeed, I think we have not
really been doing enough strategic outreach during the ICANN
face-to-face meetings. I have to say, though, that the first time,
though, we have now focused, and we had a session with the
NextGen in the Aurora room on Monday. It actually, I thought,
was a very interactive session. I’ve been talking to and
answering questions from the NextGen. So I think it’s a first step.

Page 15 of 53

EN

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

Okay. Well, you probably have to scroll to the right to the sheet.
Yeah. All the way across. Yeah. Right there. Good.
What happens is now there’s a drop-down to select the region.
Because now we’ve aggregated all of this information, we can
now see in terms of how many countries in the region, how
many countries have GAC representatives, how many have
ccTLD representation in the ccNSO.
There’s another sheet. I won’t show it today, but the regional
RALO

dashboards

can

then

automatically

import

this

information, and then you can do comparisons as to which
countries have ALSes in the ccNSO, ALSes in the GAC, and which
ones don’t have any. I think those that don’t have any
representation in the ICANN community probably could be a
focus, in terms of for CROPP proposals to go to that country or
territory. So it’s a way of allowing to do an empirical analysis
and deciding which country is a priority, in terms of trying to get
new persons from At-Large.
Any other questions? Oh, I see – okay. I see there’s a queue here.
Okay. Well, all right. All right. I see Jason, so go ahead.

JASON HYNDS:

Thank you. Great work on doing this. Congratulations to you all.
Well, two things. You mentioned “we” a lot, and I wasn’t exactly

Page 16 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

clear on who was doing the follow-up outreach conversation, in
terms of contacting GAC and ccNSO-type country reps and
encouraging further formation of the ALSes.
Secondly, I think the initial outreach to people and the sustained
engagement are almost two different tasks and sets of efforts.
I’m hoping that we’ll have some stronger strategies for
strengthening ALSes, not only just creating them. I really think
that we need to perhaps mentor a lot better within the RALOs,
and in terms of both the new and maybe dormant ALSes. I’m
hoping that we have some good strategies for that.
One other quick thing. You’re getting this data from the staff?
Because I’m thinking that the announcement on the public page
and who actually participates might vary sometimes. So you
have the data of who actually was able to execute the
Fellowship?

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Jason. Indeed, one of the concerns is working group
engagement because I think that’s one huge concern in that the
working groups, people can volunteer to be involved in
activities, such as outreach and engagement. We keep
postponing the discussion on working group revitalization, but I
think that’s probably an important component. How do you not
only get persons inside working groups, but also retain them? So

Page 17 of 53

EN

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

that discussion will be happening, most likely on our next
outreach and engagement call. So that’s one thing.
The

information

was

gleaned

from

the

Fellowship’s

announcements. We searched back through the archives of
announcements posted on ICANN’s websites and captured the
information there.
I realize there’s a long queue here, but let’s please keep the
intervention short because we do have other things on the
agenda. Okay. Let’s go up the table then. Seun?

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Thank you very much. One of my comments had to do with
tracking lack of ALS presence, which you have already
responded to. So that is fine.
When you were talking about the things that you had to do to
get some of this data, it’s very, very taxing. I’m wondering if,
perhaps – and I see Janice is in the room – of course there’d be
some more cordial relationship between this group and the staff
so that we can get the spreadsheet versions of some of these
things. Copying from the website and now putting it in a fresh
spreadsheet before you transfer it is kind of – I think staff would
have some of this – excuse me – raw data that we can just easily
make use of. Thank you.

Page 18 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Noted. Vanda?

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

Thank you. Very interesting, astute. I’d like to raise two points.
One is I belong to this list that the Fellowship has had since they
begin, so each one that was in the selection group. And those
Fellows get contacted all the time.
But there is one question I really don’t know. I believe that they
used to send some report on what they are doing and what kind
of things they are attending. Was not that, Janice?

JANICE DOUMA LANGE:

No. I never told you [inaudible].

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

No? No, they don’t give feedback because in the list sometimes
they said, “Well, I met in this meeting,” or that meeting or
something. We could use better this group of information
because the group is there. We could use better. That’s some
thoughts that we could explore a little bit more. That’s the main
point on that.
One is collect the information. Participate more in those groups,
and maybe in Facebook. Get some more information more close

Page 19 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

to our points. Yeah. And publish maybe more information about
what we are doing. Send the links to them. Some kind of better
of use of what we already have. That’s my point.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Vanda. Heidi, I see your hand raised.

HEIDI ULLRICH:

I’m not going to jump the queue.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Okay, I thought you were going to respond. Okay. Aziz, you
had your hand –

AZIZ HILALI:

No, I no longer have my hand up.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Oh, okay. Satish?

SATISH BABU:

Thank you, Dev. I think this is a very admirable kind of work, and
very useful for the future. My comment is regarding the fact that
as we continue to develop this further, we must also not forget
that there is a bunch of people who are outside this but are

Page 20 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

nevertheless useful as volunteers. So people who are not
Fellows, people who belong to countries where there are no
Fellows, how do we bring them into this? Is that a possibility at
all? Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Well, thanks. If they are eligible under the Fellowship criterion, I
think what we can do is then try to see if there is opportunity to
have an outreach event that such potential At-Large individuals
or Structures will be there, and therefore use CROPP to send the
person there. So that would be my first approach.

JANICE DOUMA LANGE:

Dev, I don’t know who else is in the queue. I don’t mean to jump
in front of anyone. I know I jumped into this a bit late, but I’ve
watched the compilation of the statistics that have been
happening, which is great. I love when people do my work for
me.
I’m trying to see the idea of what you’re trying to get from the
numbers, because obviously at this point there are names
behind the numbers, not contact addresses. We talked last time
about trying to do that. I added onto the Fellowship application
because of conversation with Dev and At-Large so that from this
point on in the application, part of the acceptance of being an

Page 21 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

applicant is that you accept that your e-mail address could be
used for contact with ICANN, the same as we do for registration
here. So that will make it available for me to be able to share an
e-mail address, where before I didn’t feel that I could do that
because that wasn’t part of the agreement when you applied.
But now it will be part of terms for the ongoing application.
My little pitch for the review in public comment right now for the
Fellowship application process. For anyone can take a look, it’s
in its 45-day public comment to look at the application process,
which includes no longer adhering to an outside entity’s
developing country list as a first filter to who can be a Fellow,
which certainly will open up for other underserved and
underrepresented countries, which is out intent. So those who
have previously not been eligible to become a Fellow and have
that be their journey into ICANN now will be able to bring others.
But your point is taken for me, Satish, in that everybody doesn’t
come through this path. So we have our NextGen at ICANN,
which we’re just starting to learn about. If no one knows, it’s our
sixth round. So this is very new. It’s as new as when Vanda was
part of our selection committee in 2007 in the brand-new
Fellowship Program. It took us about three years to get our feet
under us with that program.

Page 22 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

So the good news is that NextGen has learned, and the
candidates, the 15 that are here, separate from the five
Ambassadors, are just blowing the minds of everyone that I’m
talking to. I just finished talking to Tony Harris and Tony Holmes
from the Internet Service Provider, and they said, “Oh my God.
Where did you get those 15?” I said, “Yeah, Debbie had to dig far
and wide.”
There’s an amazing pool of individuals coming in through
different avenues, but if they’re not in a structured program, it’s
really difficult to capture them. I think that’s something we all
really need to work on. It’s easy when we bring them in and
there’s a sheltered path and we can bring them to the table. We
need to do a better job of retaining those individuals, for sure,
but they’re the easy catch.
So what I really want to work on with our Global Stakeholder
Engagement Team, now that Fellowship and NextGen are under
Sally Costerton starting now and working closely with the Global
Stakeholder Engagement Team, is that we all develop some
programs together of how to get these other newcomers. How
do we keep them at the table and not at the back of the room,
and how do we make them excited and engaged and get them to
take these spots? Because the other ones are easy. They’re going
to be easy targets because I have good communication with the
alumni base. Deb has good communication with the NextGen.

Page 23 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

But it’s that next group that I really want to get encouraged, to
how we can get them and excite them and retain them. So
anything I can do to help to that extent from outreach and inreach, I’m more than happy to sign up and help out here.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Janice. We do have, actually on the agenda, some initial
review from Glenn on the Fellowship Program, so we can
probably go into some of those slides next.
Heidi, you have a quick intervention?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Just very quickly. Thank you, Dev. Just I want to comment or
support what Seun said about the efficiency of the data
collection. Maybe this group can explore more efficient ways of
gathering this information.
The second point is sort of what Janice is saying. We have all this
great information here, but I think perhaps the next steps would
be to explore how to build the bridges with these fantastic
people that we now have, and the Fellows, and the NextGen, and
the other people, and the build those bridges within At-Large at
the regional level. Have the outreach, the direct connections
made, at that level, as well as the working groups. So really that

Page 24 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

next step on that stakeholder journey is that they’re at the door.
Open it and welcome them in.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Absolutely. Okay. Daniel?

DANIEL NANGHAKA:

Thank you very much, Dev. When we look at the Fellowship
Program and the NextGen Program, it’s truly a great program,
but I think the challenge that we have is how we follow up after
the program. When they go back to their countries, how are we
going to get them engaged? How do we get them into the
respective working groups? And how are they catching up with
the whole process?
There are platforms like ICANN Learn. Probably the new Fellows,
before they probably come to the meeting, begin to go through
this service of the lessons on ICANN Learn and get acquainted.
After getting acquainted with the lessons, then when they come
in, they begin to see the different working groups in action. After
they have seen it, are they willing to participate in this? Because
according to the database, there are Fellows that are there, but
what is their level of engagement? Thank you. Back to you, Dev.

Page 25 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks, Daniel. By the way, I know that there’s some
slides up regarding the Fellowship Program. I’m wondering
whether – oh, is there a…

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

A comment from Chris.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Chris? All right. Go ahead.

CHRIS MONDINI:

Hi. It’s Chris Mondini. I work on the Engagement Team with the
colleagues you’ve heard from and many of you. I briefed this
group at the last meeting about some of the work we’re doing to
study what we call the stakeholder journey and think of a
framework of how to convert the newcomers into more active
participants and policy-makers. I’m really inspired and humbled
by a lot of efforts that you make that we’ve been able to team
on.
I do want to introduce a little bit of a concept of a paradigm shift
as well though, and I think it echoes the last comments. I came
in a little late, so apologies.
The At-Large Structures have such an incredibly important role
in the regions for building the ICANN community in their regions

Page 26 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

and in their location. I think very often we have had, when we
were smaller and in our development stages, a paradigm that
seemed to state that being part of the ICANN community or
participating in ICANN policy-making required coming to an
ICANN meeting and showing up and making friends and bonding
and all of that stuff, which is very important to cohesion in the
community.
But as we scale and as we become more global and more
diverse, shifting the paradigm to have a little bit more of a
hybrid approach, where remote participation, participating in
working groups remotely, participating in review teams,
conducting readout sessions in your local communities of what
happened at ICANN 56, and growing the sizes, even, of your
ALSes as you increase the number of ALSes, I think this is going
to be a really crucial part of ICANN’s future. The budget and its
capacity to make meetings any bigger or more inclusive is
rapidly reaching its limit.
So I just wanted to introduce that as well, because we have a few
remote champions who really are very active. We don’t get to
meet them in person, but we know them very well remotely. I
think this is going to be a little bit more of the future of how
ICANN gets its policy work done.

Page 27 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

So of all of the issues that you’re talking about, I just wanted to
add that color as well. Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thank you, Chris. I think I believe that in fact there’s been a new
approach and a website launch, and a video even, targeted
towards newcomers, to try to get them onto that stakeholder
journey. Perhaps if you have time, we could probably show that
page afterwards. But I know now we’ve spent quite a bit more
time on this agenda, so –

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

[inaudible]

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Maureen?

MAUREEN HILYARD:

Sorry. I’ve just been listening to everyone, and the comments
have been really excellent. I just wanted to bring up that, when
we were initially establishing the database and collecting the
information, it was really to create a resource and coordinate
information that was already within the system. But it wasn’t
coordinated in a way that we, as a group, looking at the end
users – we wanted to see where all those end users were, and

Page 28 of 53

EN

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

the information was already within the system. We just needed
to coordinate it.
One of the things, too, is that we’ve found that, and has been
revealed here, everybody uses the information but has got their
own uses for the information that has been collected. I think
that, too, for us, our initial uses were related to these sorts of
information that we needed in relation to what we were doing in
ALAC and ccNSO.
One of the things, too, that really has to be kept in mind is for
the outreach and engagement working group that we are,
there’s been a change in what our focus is too, especially with
the meeting formats, so that the intentions that we had
originally with regards to the starter base and important
information has now probably been put on the back burner a
bit,

because

we’re

looking

at

meeting

formats

and

outreach/engagement activities to do with meetings and things
like that.
So it’s not to say this isn’t important, because it is. The
information and Fellowship information, all that sort of stuff, it
will be collated later on. Thank you.

Page 29 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Jason, you have a quick comment? Keep it brief, please,
because we do have other items on the agenda.

JASON HYNDS:

Yes. I hope that Chris’s comment was a commitment for
resources enabling these remote participations a lot more. I
think that is so important, so I loved his contribution.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Jason. Okay. Let’s move on to the next item – oh, Tijani.
Tijani. All right, Tijani. And this is the last intervention.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

It’s very short. You spoke about the NextGen. It should be the
next version. I don’t want it to be mixed because the NextGen is
another kind of population, and they have other kinds of
treatment. So please don’t mix them.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Noted. So let’s move on to the next item on our agenda. This is
going to be regarding the Fellowship Program. ICANN’s
Fellowship Program is out for public comment.
Next slide. You don’t need to share the screen anymore, so you
can go back to the slide. Glenn McKnight has actually done a

Page 30 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

preliminary review, and he’s put together some notes that he
wants to share with us.
Glenn, you have the floor.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Thank you. I was given 20 minutes. I don’t think I’ll need that
amount. Okay. As we’ve discussed at the very beginning, we’re
not dwelling just on the Fellowship Program, but I think it’s
important to bring this up because the Fellowship Program is
under review. As you can see, we’re asking for the community to
give comments back by July 29th for public comment, and that’s
the link to the public comment.
Next slide, please. Okay. Going through the documentation that
was provided, there’s three documents on the page. One of the
first things that historically the program has been, when they
looked at who was eligible for the Fellowship, they looked at the
World Bank income indicators for the candidates. What we’re
looking at now is a shift in terms of definition to the
underserved, the underrepresented communities around the
world, without restriction based on geographical location, which
is a huge shift.
I need to mention this, and Judith is beside me, and Garth on the
other side, as members of NARALO – and I’m sure other people

Page 31 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

in EURALO and APRALO that are excluded from the Fellowship
historically, and you won’t see them on that list that we talked
about earlier.
We’ve been advocating not for everyone in those countries, but
we were particularly interested in the tribal organizations,
meaning indigenous or First Nations or sometimes they’re called
Indians, in North America or South America, or Aborigines. We
are looking at those people, and we were advocating on behalf
of them to be part of the Fellowship Program. I think, if you look
at the documentation, you’ll see all through it that I believe
we’ve accomplished that task. And oftentimes, the term is called
“creed.”
Next slide. We’ll see, in the priorities, diversity, including gender,
sector, region, experience, interest, expertise – a new category –
indigenous. We’re looking at a real onus on a change into more
diversity. Again, I’m giving you my personal perspective on here
with NARALO.
We also have 15 US territories, and that’s part of the legacy of
U.S. history, including islands like American Samoa or [Gilbert]
Islands and a number of very small islands. But those two in
particular have never been eligible for the Fellowship Program.
In fact, there’s some great articles on American Samoa, which
has I think one of the highest costs of Internet access and a very

Page 32 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

high unemployment rate. But we hope that, with this outreach –
because we do not have any ALSes, in many ways because of
geography it doesn’t make a lot of sense for them to be part of
our NARALO community because of the time zone difference. It
really makes more sense that they’re part of –

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

APRALO.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Sorry?

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

APRALO.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Yeah. I was going to say that. APRALO. Okay, next slide – oh,
sorry. Back to the last slide I jumped over.
There is a category, non-gender category, which not everybody
is hip to, but it’s a category we may want to look at. And of
particular interest to Judith, beside me, is people with
disabilities.
Next one. Again, giving back to the community, it’s
recommended that the alumni give back by volunteering,

Page 33 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

coaching, and involvement, which we believe they have been.
We don’t really know, because all we did was the database.
Janice’s team, I’m sure, has great information about getting
involved in terms of the legacy with At-Large and its leadership,
or even just the working groups. One of the things that Judith
just handed me is an example of trying to get people involved in
the captioning project that we had successfully sponsored by
ICANN.
Clearly some individuals have been repeat Fellows, and they’ve
been active. But we really don’t know how many. And we don’t
know why certain people just disappear, and that’s another
issue. We don’t know a lot of these answers, and it’s anecdotal.
Next one. Okay. In comparison to other grants, I believe the third
document in that pool of documents there, they actually do a
comparison of grant programs. You’ll see that there’s a wide
range of how different groups actually define who is an
applicant. Sometimes they define it by age. For example, I
believe the IETF Fellowship Program is age-limited. I think the
ISOC Ambassador Program is age-limited.
So there is quite a range on how to do this program in the future,
so we really encourage you to take the opportunity to give input
into the – this is our opportunity now to make changes. We want
more transparency and more disclosure on the future Fellows. If

Page 34 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

you have any experience with other grant programs, how they
did and how people are successfully brought through the
process, this is the time to share your knowledge.
Next slide. Okay. As I stated, the current composition of the
Fellowship Committee is five members representing Asia-Pacific,
Europe, Africa, Latin America, and Western Asia. An action that
I’m suggesting is we include the underserved communities on
this selection committee as me move forward. Perhaps if
indigenous people are included into it, that a person from the
indigenous community or the US, Canada, Australia, or others, it
would help in the process of giving their feedback on future
people in the program.
Next one. Okay. Item number 6, Fellowship and capacity
building. The goal of the program, the global participation of the
Fellowship Program, aims to build capacity for the multistakeholder model. Using a results-based management tool of
outcomes and return on investment for the program, we can
have tangible proof that the goals of the program has built
capacity. That’s clear. There’s a substantial amount of
investment. What is the results?
I think we need that information to give back to the community.
We started this process, but we need a lot more work. Clearly in
some regions we have seen a link between Fellows, alumni,

Page 35 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

mentors, and active At-Large members, as I started earlier in this
meeting. But I don’t think that we’ve gone far enough in terms of
the analysis. We want to know why we’ve lost certain people.
How do we turn somebody that’s a passive observer to an active
member within our community?
Okay. Next slide. Back to you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Glenn. Thanks for doing that preliminary analysis [in]
the comments. I see a queue. Okay, let’s keep the interventions
short because we do have more to tackle – our next agenda item
regarding outreach activities in ICANN 57. Siranush?

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

Thank you, Chair. Actually, I would like to bring one point here
related to outreach and connection with the Fellowship. Just an
example, in APRALO, out of six leaders, there are Fellows. So
they came from the Fellowship family.
I would say that if a Fellow comes to the At-Large meeting, he
may get nothing from the discussions here, especially if this
person is there for the first time. What our team did, we usually
go ourselves to the Fellows. We are trying to find out initially the
people are from Asia-Pacific and contact them in person
because they might not know us.

Page 36 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

Just as an example, for the last one or two years, out of eight or
nine new ALSes, the majority of them came as an ALS due to our
connections in person to them, going and catching them up and
just showing how to become an ALS, showing the way, because
this is really difficult for them to find out by themselves. So there
is a need for us going to them, because it’s really difficult for
them to come to us because they are not familiar with this.
So it depends on the outreach efforts, which every RALO can do.
I’m sure Fellowship staff there is really very supportive and
open, and Fellows are really brilliant people there. So you may
find a lot of them. Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Siranush, and, indeed, very good points. It’s really the
human follow-up and direct contact with those Fellows that can
turn them from passive to probably then becoming more active.
Aziz, and then the other person in the back there.

AZIZ HILALI:

I’m going to speak in French. Okay. I’d like to thank Glenn for his
analysis. He spoke a lot about populations that were situated in
faraway places.

Page 37 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

I’d like to repeat something that I already said one year ago
about the criteria that we use for the Fellowship and for Fellows.
Before, it was an online form that the applicants could use, but
I’d like to have some work done before those persons – because
I agree with you: Those people are excellent. We saw it in
Marrakesh. We can see it here. But if one of those Fellows came
in the middle of the discussion we had this morning about the
criteria of how to select our selection committee, this Fellow
would leave immediately because it was a very boring
discussion.
So I want to answer here the question of why people don’t want
to come to ALAC meetings. Well, this is first. Then, secondly, I
regret that people from ICANN are not here because – my
proposal is, why don’t we – I will repeat what I said so you can
follow.
The applicant can use the online form. Sometimes you don’t
know if it’s the same person who applies through this form. I’d
like to have more work with outreach work. I’d like to know how
we can work with these people in how to explain to them what
the SO and AC are so these people are trained and can have a
better – after this capacity building we can give to these
students or to these Fellows. In Marrakesh, for example we gave
them some capacity-building so they knew what ICANN was and
what Internet governance was. They were my students.

Page 38 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

So their intervention, for those who were there, when they spoke
they were – we worked in the Marrakesh University with [Daniel]
and all the team of ALAC, and it was very interesting to work with
those students. They were very well-informed about ICANN and
about our work. So we can improve the participation of this
person, because the person already knows the ICANN system.
How many among us have already understood all the ICANN
structures and after how many meetings? In my case, it was after
some meetings.
I also want to speak about the Marrakesh experience, which was
a very good experience, I think. This experience we had in
Marrakesh with those students was very good. If we do that
every time we have a meeting in Africa or in Asia or in North
America, if we can work with people, invite those people, it’s
cheaper for us.
I’ve invited 60 students, and it cost $3,600. It was cheap. It is
cheap to invite students and give them some capacity building
and try to work with those Internet experts and do capacity
building with them so they can understand better the challenges
of the Internet and Internet governance in general, and to know
who is really interesting to work into ICANN because, as you
said, some people are really excellent. They are in the Fellowship
Program and then they disappear.

Page 39 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Aziz. And, actually, you kind of summarized what
activities I would have done in Marrakesh. We can now, when we
go to discussing, what the outreach activities in ICANN 57. We
already have an idea from what was done before. Thanks for
that.
I noticed somebody wanted to respond in the back here.
Quickly, though. Then this person.

RAO NAVEED BIN RAIS:

I’m an ICANN Fellow and an ICANN coach and, to some extent, I
belong to the leadership of the Fellowship Program. I did for
Marrakesh. Basically in the Fellowship Program, for the last one
year or so, we’ve had a coaching program that prepares the
Fellows to come prepared for what ICANN is. I just wanted to
respond that there has been an effort that is allowing us to get
the Fellows prepared, to get them to know what ICANN is, what
it does, what are ACs and SOs, what are different constituencies,
and all that. There’s a margin of improvement, and we are
working on that right now, but the process exists.
But what I feel is missing as far as the At-Large is concerned – I
belong to an ALS structure as well. I’m President of ISOC
Islamabad chapter, which is an ALS. What I feel from a Fellows

Page 40 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

standpoint, there is something that is missing is. When you
reach to the Fellows, they are unable to understand how to get
engaged into ALAC, and this part is still missing. They don’t
know how to join. They’re only told, “Okay. You need to be in an
ALS to join or to be part,” and they find it very complex, very
hard to do. There has to be a way to make them onboard
without going through all those parts.
Somebody was saying before – I guess Tijani was saying that it is
easier for them to go to the NCSG. Yes, because there’s a direct
way of joining them. There’s just an online form that they fill
while being here. That gets approved even during the meeting,
and they find it easy to join them. So At-Large needs to come up
with something like this so that people feel more comfortable. I
agree with Siranush. Go and talk to them is very helpful, but we
need to find alternate ways to do that as well. Thanks.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks. Thanks for that intervention, actually. Actually, I
would like to follow up with you after this session because that
was one of the things we tried to with the NextGen presentation
– and this other thing, how to join, was more like how to engage.
I’d like to get your feedback as to how that worked or didn’t
work as well.

Page 41 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

We have a speakers’ queue here. I see that – oh, five minutes. All
right. I’ll tell you what. Let’s see if we can just quickly – because I
know there’s some statements that need to be made on this
agenda item. So I’d like to just go to this quickly. All right. Glenn,
you have –

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

I’m sorry. The discussion has gone back to the first, and you
ignored my slides. I’m going to stress it again. I was talking
about the changes. I want to you encourage you to look – this is
our opportunity to make it better. This is our opportunity to
come and give suggestions, and I believe they’re listening. I
don’t know how many of you in this room have given comments.
You have some time. So what I talked about is from my
perspective of how we were not part of the process, and I’m
excited to see us being part of the process, because I think and I
know that there is a direct path, if we do it right, to getting
Fellows to become active members in the RALOs.
So I’m excited to see the changes. I’m excited to see more
people with NARALO because most of us are getting older. We
don’t have a lot of younger faces, so we really want to encourage
– in fact, Judith is the youngest one that we brought in. I’m not
laughing. She is. Okay? Judith, I didn’t laugh.

Page 42 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

[inaudible]

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Thank you.

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: All right. I know there’s a whole speaker queue, but I know that
we have something just to mention regarding the planning of
outreach activities for ICANN 57. I just want to tackle that first,
and then come back. We could probably even give the
interpreters a break and then continue the conversation.
Let’s just move to just bring up the slide here, the next slide. It’s
just two key points. It’s going to be held in Hyderabad, India, and
is the Meeting C format. So it’s from Thursday the 3rd to
Wednesday the 9th. That’s a fairly lengthy meeting, and therefore
a lot more opportunities for potential for multiple outreach
activities.
I know that APRALO, given that it’s going to be in the APRALO
region, has had some preliminary discussions, and perhaps
someone would be willing to take the floor to just say a few
words as to some of the ideas or thinking? Siranush?

Page 43 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

EN

Thank you, Chair. There was no other way than it should be in
Asia-Pacific for this long meeting. So always good there. We had
the chance to meet with our leadership team here in Helsinki
and to discuss because, really considering this short notice, we
have a lot to do on our plate.
There were some discussions related to connection with the
NextGen, which will completely consist of Asia-Pacific
representations. So representatives will be from Asia-Pacific.
There will be some activities related to NextGen.
We also talked about those two young people who can be
Ambassadors from NARALO, actually the Board approved their
request to have two Ambassadors. It was planned that those two
Ambassadors should be in Puerto Rico as NARALO, so they will
be coming to Hyderabad. We will focus also those two people to
be a part of this outreach and engagement component for us.
We also talked about inclusiveness. This will be probably one of
the highlights of outreach and engagement in Asia-Pacific, to
involve NGOs – Satish has a lot on his shoulders now to go back
to India and work on that. To involve NGOs who will make this
meeting inclusive. So this is another area where we started
already to think.
Satish gave an update a couple of minutes ago that there is
potential that the Indian government, whom Satish sent the

Page 44 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

proposal to on behalf of APRALO to support ALSes, of which
there are six based in India, to get funding from the Indian
government to be in Hyderabad. So this is almost in the process
of approval, and we are expecting the final yes from the Indian
government. Yet there are also opportunities to discuss with the
government the outreach aspects and engagement in
Hyderabad.
So these are just the global discussion aspects which we had
time to do in person here, but a lot is expected and a lot will be
started right after the Helsinki meeting. So that’s much from my
side. If someone from APRALO would like to add, please.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Siranush, and, indeed, very good points there. I was just
taking notes there. So you have to involve engagement with the
NextGen. The RALO Ambassadors are also going to be coming,
so there’s an opportunity to do outreach to them; involving the
NGOs from the area, in Hyderabad; and also potentially getting
funding for all the six ALSes to be attending the face-to-face. I
think that’s an excellent, excellent thing.
Satish?

Page 45 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

SATISH BABU:

EN

Thank you, Dev. To add to what Siranush has mentioned, while
the NGOs [and not ALSes] six of them are in Hyderabad with us.
There was this question that was raised by Heidi as to what
they’re going to do when they come to our meeting. Is there
anything specific we can provide for them?
I wanted to [inaudible] Tijani, asking if there’s a capacitybuilding session that can be planned for them. Maybe even
some of us who are there from other regions can join in. So that
is one possibility.
Second is that the Government of India seems to be supportive.
The point is that if there is anything specific we want out of
them, we have to inform them in advance. Yesterday, there was
this get-together in the Indian Embassy, where I spoke to the
Secretary. As Siranush mentioned, they are supportive. There’s
one person earmarked for this purpose in Hyderabad. Here’s a
very senior person in the government, and he told us, “Whatever
you require, you tell us in advance, and we will make any
support that is required.”
Now, there’s also some expectations from their side. They would
like some of our experts to address students in the universities.
Hyderabad has got a lot of universities. It’s a university city.
From their side, even if we don’t have it on our agenda directly,
they would like us to address the local student community with

Page 46 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

our experts. So it doesn’t have to be ALAC alone or At-Large
alone. It could be any other part of ICANN as well.
The other point is that we have also NGOs, activists, potential
ALSes who we can be brought in at this point. So we have to
basically define what we would like out of this proposed
interaction [inaudible]. Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Satish, and – okay, sorry.

[IVA]:

[inaudible] from ISOC India [inaudible] ALS. I would like to add
to Satish’s observations so that some of the points could also be
highlighted in the communication to the Government of India.
One is the environment of funding for NGOs in India, which are
restrained. Whenever there is some foreign funding, the NGOs
are questioned or restrained from receiving and utilizing the
funds. In that context, it becomes very important that funds for
ALS participation come from the government from India. So,
highlighting that point, we could say that, for NGO participation,
government should make funds extensively available.
Second, the observation about student participation. There is a
tendency – I don’t say that it has happened conclusively. There
is a tendency to bring in students from the local colleges in large

Page 47 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

numbers who don’t have any idea of what ICANN is about, what
the Internet is about. Rather than that, we can utilize this
opportunity to approach the premier institutions, like [IAP] and
[IAM] and select students for participation, kind of a rough
selection process to determine their inclination to participate in
the Internet and Internet governance. And then properly orient
them. Orient them well in advance so that they take part as
relevant participants. So these are the two points.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, [Iva]. Aziz, you wanted to make a very brief intervention,
but I just want to caution that the interpreters need to take a
break.

AZIZ HILALI:

As far as the experiment in Marrakesh, just one point. You need
to be careful. If you bring a lot of students, you need to plan
spots. It was really impossible to integrate them into a room,
and that was difficult in Marrakesh. We actually had to plan a
spot. We talked to the university. We transported them there,
and we brought ALAC experts to present to them there and to do
the outreach activities there.

Page 48 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Aziz. That’s a very good point in terms of if we bring too
many students, how do we then really engage with all of them.
So that’s a very good point.
Well, we’ll let the interpreters go, but let’s continue very briefly
again because we are going over time. So please be mindful. We
are going to be without interpretations.
Siranush?

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

Thank you. I would like to thank Aziz for this intervention. Yeah,
we have talked about this. In parallel with having NextGen, who
are already students with their age, we may not go both for
NextGen and students, because it’s really hard, as you said, to
bring students from other universities and make them involved
and integrated during only one or two days.
So this is a challenging part, and we really do not have too much
time for prep work. Thanks for your experience sharing here. We
really rely on AFRALO experience for NGO integration and
capacity-building stuff, so we are looking forward to that.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks, Siranush. Okay. I know we have gone quite a bit
beyond time, but I do want to skip some interventions. I know

Page 49 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

some persons from the NextGen wanted to say a few words, so I
think it’s important to hear what they have to say.
The gentleman there, please introduce yourself.

SONIGITU EKPE:

I’m not in NextGen, but I’m [inaudible]. This is my first time. My
reaction is to the presentation he did on the feedback approach.
If I might add, if people are brought to participate in meetings
during the Fellowship, then there is a need for a follow-up. So
within even countries, just like he’d mentioned in the Americas,
where you have some exclusion due to the terms they have put –
but if Fellows have returned back to their country and they carry
out outreach, by right, we are supposed have a database where
this feedback can be documented.
Then when Fellowships are considered, they should also
consider the geographical spread within countries. There are
specific countries that you find out that the geographical spread
of the Fellowship concentrates on one section. It’s really not fair.
If a country has about four geographic regions, as in west, east,
north and south, and it’s only the south that goes or not, it’s not
fair. It’s not a good spread. That should be taken into cognizance
because with Google you could be able to see the point where
Fellows are already mounted.

Page 50 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

The next issue is about remote participation. Most times, people
are willing to participate remotely. But keeping them for a long
time without having a tea break is not really beneficial, or it’s
not attractive. So people didn’t want to organize a [inaudible]
during the Marrakesh event. I knew it’d cost me keeping them in
the hotel from morning to evening for the days they wanted us
to [inaudible] without a tea break or something. Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks for that. And I believe it was – yeah. Please identify
yourself.

JELENA OZEGOVIC:

Hello, everybody. I’m a NextGen Ambassador this year. This is
my second ICANN meeting. I wanted to follow up. I have an
impression that, for the people to join into ALAC, they ought to
be interested in policy making, maybe some general stuff,
because we as NextGens, as Fellows, have a lot of people who
are interested in tech. And I don’t think that they will be pretty
much motivated to be involved into ALAC.
So my idea is to just research and just join and just do some
additional interviews about people who are NextGen and
Fellows about what they’re interested in. Especially tackle those
who got lost in the process and aren’t feeling secure enough and

Page 51 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

don’t have a clear idea where they see themselves in ICANN.
Thanks.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks. Just to very briefly respond, there is an At-Large
Technology Task Force session at 8:00 A.M. I believe it’s in this
room tomorrow. So if you’re interested in technology, there you
go. There’s something of interest to you.
Okay. I think we can – very brief intervention because, again – I’ll
just mentioned again that I just want to thank the interpreters,
and I got to make sure that they stop interpreting so they can
take a break. But we can continue the recording. So thanks
again to the interpreters.

ADEEL SADIQ:

Maybe if I’m not wrong, it has been like three years and eight
ICANN meetings since the NextGen Program was launched. So if
you are discussing anything about the Fellowship here on the
screen, I would really appreciate that, from the Hyderabad
meeting onward, you will put a few slides about NextGen as well.
Thank you.

Page 52 of 53

HELSINKI – ALAC Outreach and Engagement Subcommittee

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Noted. Glenn, you probably have one more comment to
say?

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

Yeah. We did not intend this to be a full discussion on the merits
or problems with the Fellowship Program or the NextGen. The
whole purpose of this working group – and Olivier is down at the
other end for EURALO – and it’s only relatively recently that
we’ve really reached out to the Fellows and NextGen and made
them aware, having meetings. It was largely ignored. I think
we’re making up for lost time. So please be patient with us. We
want to engage with the community. I believe it’s a fantastic
community for us to be involved with. Thank you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Glenn. On that note, I’d just like to thank the tech
support staff for this session. Please follow up with us. In fact, I
actually plan to talk to many of you. I know that not everybody
had a chance to give their inputs, but there is opportunity
actually to come on the next call and of course continue the
discussions there. So I’d like to thank everyone for the
interventions. It was very interesting conversations. This session
is now adjourned. Thank you all.
[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 53 of 53

