HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 11:30 to 12:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We now have, with a slight day, another session that is
something that is also new. It's a session -- as you know, the B
meeting has also been set up with a view to do outreach and
help people to do capacity-building for newcomers, for people
who haven't been able to follow this very closely. So this is
something that we introduced this time for this meeting. It's a
so-called capacity-building session that is led by our working
group on underserved regions, which will lead this session and
do a little bit of capacity-building with us on what the GAC is,
how it works, how ICANN works, and so on and so forth. Please
do come up to lead that session.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Maybe as we are setting up, thank you very much, Thomas, and
thank you, everyone. Just a very quick reminder of what the
underserved region working group focuses on mainly. And it's to
increase the level of understanding and knowledge of GAC
representatives from underserved regions as well as increasing
their participation.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

Now specifically on capacity-building, we've kindly previously
focused mainly on Africa, the Caribbean, Pacific and Indian
Ocean islands, Central and South America, Southeast Asia. And
we organize these capacity-building sessions every two years.
The last one was in Dublin at ICANN47.
And we are trying to begin to formalize it by creating on-demand
induction and ongoing briefing materials, including videos, slide
decks, briefs, and brochures in all the appropriate languages.
And we are also working very closely in collaboration with other
GAC and ICANN community and working groups to build
capacity in areas such as, for example, the public safety,
cybersecurity, law enforcement, privacy, consumer protection,
geographic names.

I think the current discussion we had

regarding the relationship between Country Code Top Level
Domain Names and governments on technical areas regarding
the DNS, DNS security, IPv6, and IDNs.
And I'll let my co-chair, Pua Hunter, speak a little bit on the
objectives of the working group as well.

PUA HUNTER:

Thank you, Alice.
And just to follow on from Alice's introduction, an overall
objective of the underserved regions working group is to

Page 2 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

increase the level of understanding and knowledge of GAC
representatives, which subsequently will lead to an increase in
meaningful participation as well as potential increase in the
number of GAC members.
The working group aims to develop a range of support, advice,
and assistance mechanisms aimed at increasing participation,
increasing knowledge, understanding and capacity of GAC
members, increasing participation and encourage the growth
and development of the domain name industry.
And among the deliverables of the underserved regions working
group is capacity-building which is now in session. And we
warmly welcome your comments, suggestions, ideas, and any
assistance you have towards increasing participation and
engagement of GAC members.
I now pass on to our presenters.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Anne-Rachel, please. Thank you.

ANNE-RACHEL INNE:

Thanks so much. Good morning, everybody. My name is AnneRachel Inne, and I work with the government engagement team.
We're based in Geneva. And also what we call the government

Page 3 of 33

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

engagement team; that is, stakeholders -- I mean, an
engagement team that is in the regions. So I am going to also
introduce you to some of my colleagues before I start that are in
the room.
So I'm not sure -- okay. I can see Chris Mondini takes care of -Chris, please, could you stand up. Chris Mondini takes care of
the North Americas in general. Jean-Jacques Sahel and Veni
Markovski, Pierre Dandjinou, Jia-Rong Low, Rodrigo, Baher
Esmat, and Save are all -- Michael Yakushev are all my
colleagues that are in the regions and that really are the ones
that you see on a daily basis that are taking care of most of the
capacity initiatives that I'm going to tell you about.
And in Geneva, my colleagues are Tarek Kamel and Nigel
Hickson.

We also take care of the intergovernmental

organizations in both Geneva and New York.
So next slide, please. Okay. So there you go. This is the agenda.
So I'm only going to dwell on really three, four slides, because
these slides will be -- or have been sent to most of you, so if you
can have a look, that would be good. And what we want today is
to really have a good discussion around some of the things that
we're doing on the ground that, you know, we know are
working, and others that you may actually push us to do
because, you know, you know better what helps you in terms of

Page 4 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

making sure that people -- yourselves included -- understand
what ICANN is doing.
So I'm going to talk a little bit about the global stakeholder
engagement team and our work, also the GE team in regions. I'll
give just a few examples of what is happening in the Middle East
and Africa, Latin America, Oceania, so Asia-Pacific really and
Oceania, and then the government engagement team, what we
do in Geneva and New York, and a little -- a few ideas on the way
forward.
Go ahead.
Thank you.
So some of the ways that we're interacting with the community
are listed here.
We have Webinars. For example, a few of the regional teams this
time, before coming to the ICANN meeting with this new format
on the "B" meeting and the talk about policy and all the matters
that are going to be discussed at ICANN, were discussed with the
communities in general, and for some regions with GAC folks in
particular.
So the Webinars are a way to make sure that when we're coming
into ICANN meetings, the communities know what is happening
exactly at the ICANN meetings, but they're also -- they can be on

Page 5 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

specific subjects that are very dear to the regions and to the
representatives on demand. They can ask the teams to have a
Webinar on a specific subject. So that's how the Webinars go.
And they can also be in several languages. They're translated.
You can have channels whereby, you know, we have other
languages than English. Especially in region.
We have conference calls.
Conference calls are, again, means that people use to -- our
teams use to make sure that people have an understanding of a
specific subject. Again, most of the time on request by the
country people or the region's people.
We have individual briefings. When, for example, our teams are
in a place for either a global, a regional, or a national meeting,
they sit on one-to-one meetings with the people from the
country and, you know, GAC representatives are often, very
often, part of the teams that are being briefed, and they talk
about what is happening at ICANN in general but also on things
like the regional strategies.
As you know, at ICANN we have some regions that have devised
their own strategies on how to go about, you know, dealing with
participation, interaction with other groups at ICANN, and all of

Page 6 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

that, so all of these things are touched upon when they go in,
you know, one-to-one briefings.
There are specific meetings that are also convened with the
communities in region. These are, again, on regional strategies
or on different topics like -- you know, that are related to the
DNS in region.
Some, for example, last year I recall the African team did a
meeting on intellectual property so they could discuss, you
know, issues of -- related to what you just saw in terms of
domain names and the issues that are specific for regions and,
you know, come to a better understanding and, you know,
better efficient meetings in -- inside ICANN.
Mailing lists.
We have quite a few of the regions that have their own mailing
lists, so everything that is about ICANN is distributed on those
mailing lists. Everything that is about GAC is also, as possible
and as known, distributed on those mailing lists. And some of
the teams even have mailing lists that are dedicated only to GAC
representatives. In that, actually following regional Internet
registries that are some of our colleagues where they have, you
know, the same thing. You know, government working groups.

Page 7 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

We have basic trainings also and workshops on DNS, on security,
on -- again, as I said, on Internet -- intellectual property or simply
what are -- what is the Internet inside places like academia and
others.
We have also engagement with non-GAC members, so the -- as
we've seen, the numbers have gone up, and this is really
subsequent to quite a few of the trainings and engagement that
the teams are having out there with the communities.
Next slide, please.
So in the Middle East and Africa region, the ICANN team, on
request by the community again, have had what is called a DNS
entrepreneurship center. It's a center that was established to
make sure that we have trainings that are for people, for
example, who are interested in becoming registries, registrars.
This is a region, as you know, that historically has had, you
know, little interaction or little representatives in terms of
registries and registrars, so the DNS entrepreneurship center is a
place where you have, you know, some of the topics that are
listed here: DNS business development, registry best practices,
SWOT analysis for national domain name market, domain name
dispute resolution, what is it, how can a ccTLD or, you know,
registries and registrars that are in that market and also the
businesses use that.

Page 8 of 33

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

DNS operations and security. So these are also train the trainers
workshops.
DNS operations and DNSSEC.

So in that entrepreneurship

center that serves for Middle East and Africa, these are some of
the things that are being done.
Go ahead, please. Next slide.
So we talked about topical meetings. Lastly, for example, in the
topical meeting that Africa did, there was something -- the
community came with some requests.

They wanted more

capacity building on domain name dispute resolution because
that is becoming an issue. They wanted a constitution of a
forum of legal experts so they could -- you know, that are
interested in domain names, and this is -- again, this comes
because of the -- you know, the raise -- the rise in dispute on
domain names. As the community gets more connected and as
people use the Internet, of course frictions arise in terms of, you
know, ownership of -- of brands, of -- you know, as we've seen
with Olga's and Gema's, you know -- some of the --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Page 9 of 33

(Off microphone.)

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

ANNE-RACHEL INNE:

-- yeah, geographic names, country code users, and all of that.
We also do, again -- so the -- you know, the country visits and
regional visits, they wanted more volunteers in Africa on IDNs,
internationalized domain names.

That is very important

because for some of the communities it is -- in the region we
have quite a few people who are not literate in either French,
Spanish, or, you know, any of the official languages. So it is
important that we have content that is also dedicated to -- and
that is put out for people in their native languages.
Go ahead.
So the next few slides I won't really dwell on because we don't
have too much time. You know, there's a lot of the -- what I
talked about already that are on these slides. Webinars, GACdedicated.
Go ahead.
So we also do, yes, capacity building, of course, in terms of
youth and academia, as I said. You know, ccTLD internship
programs.
Go ahead.

Page 10 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

In the Asia-Pacific region, there are quite a few, you know,
trainings, also, collaboration with GAC members for trainings
that are on DNSSEC and DNS abuse and how to handle those.
Law enforcement training is something that is also pretty dear,
and I think that the working group is interested in that.
Go ahead.
Go ahead again.
APAC. So some of the things that we're doing with Oceania, and
I think Pua can tell us more about that, actually.
Go ahead.
In Geneva and New York, we do a lot of briefings, mostly, for the
permanent missions and the IGOs.
Go ahead.
So on way forward, some of the things that we have done so far
don't really come on the -- in the void. We have been working
with the GAC, another GAC working group that has now been
stopped because it had fulfilled all its mission, with which we
came out with guidelines that gave us some of the things that
we're doing here.
So Webinars, conference calls, individual briefings, meetings
with communities in region, mailing lists, basic trainings,
Page 11 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

engagement with non-GAC members, you know, these were all
coming from the guidelines.
One of the things that we haven't done systematically is, for
example, you know, for the regional teams to work directly with
the GAC working groups. The underserved region is one. There
are other working groups. My colleagues and I are more than
happy to work with these working groups on, you know, things
that we can do together.
Dedicated regional work for governments. Example, you know,
GAC Africa members have requested the team to have a meeting
for them because a lot of them came out saying, you know,
there's a lot of work going on in the African region and they
really have a hard time following. They would like to see if there
is any opportunity for this fiscal year to have a meeting of their
members to, you know, talk about some of the issues that
they're having.
How to reconcile GAC early engagement in ICANN and capacity
building. You've been talking about that. We'll be happy to help
when you come up with things that can be done.
What other subjects also to approach as appropriate and how to
operationalize all of that is one of the things that we really
would be happy to, you know, hear from you all.

Page 12 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

And I think this is what I have. Thank you very much, Alice.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Anne-Rachel, and thank you for your presentation
and thank you to your team as well.
I think we'd like to welcome some discussions, questions,
comments, requests, for GAC members, please.
Argentina?

ARGENTINA:

Thank you, Alice. Thank you, Anne-Rachel. Very valuable work
of all your teams in the regions.
I would like to mention some activities that I do as an academic,
especially focused in Latin America or the Americas.
We -- every year we hold a School of Internet Governance and
ICANN has always been actively engaged and participating, this
year a little bit more with a very interesting presentation about
the IANA transition, and we grant fellowships to all the
participants. Not -- I'm only contributing from an academic
perspective, but we have some colleagues from the region that
have joined after the school and then they join different
activities in ICANN, so every time we have this, we share with the
GAC so it's good that ICANN is -- is engaging with the school from

Page 13 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

the very beginning, so this is very good for letting the community
know about ICANN. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Indonesia?

INDONESIA:

Yes. Thank you. I just would like to attract the attention to the
availability of the ICANN hub in several areas. I think a few
months ago we already have the hub in Africa, and a few years -or two years ago we already set up one in Singapore. You know,
perhaps this ICANN hub can stimulate supporting ICANN
activities in the region, and I would like to make sure that this
hub is -- will be more and more active to look after internal
development in the region itself, as we always -- as ICANN
always cite, one world, one Internet. You know, one region
should also have one Internet. Otherwise, we will have many,
many regional Internets, which we do not want. Okay. Thank
you.

COOK ISLANDS:

Hello again, everyone.
Just from a Pacific region, I see there's a lot of work being done
by Save and very good work, too. So although there's a lot of

Page 14 of 33

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

development, there's also not enough coming from the national
level. The capacity building is one thing to bring the countries
up to a level of awareness, but at the national level, they must
also do some work. And I think it's important to still have ICANN
support, especially in the legal areas, to build on frameworks for
the countries in these underserved regions.
I believe there's also other areas in these regions that share the
same challenge that we have.
Also, on top of this capacity building that's been delivered to
countries in the Pacific, be mindful also that not everyone have
access to the Internet. So trainings that's been -- What's been
happening is the capacity building has been delivered in
country.

However, to continue with training online is not

necessarily -- not necessarily good in terms of the Internet is not
always there, and if it is, it's not affordable.
I hope to get some comments and response on this.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Perhaps to go back to those two last questions that Anne-Rachel
has asked here, it would be great if GAC colleagues could
perhaps, if not now, but we could have that discussion later.
One of the big questions is how to reconcile GAC early
engagement in ICANN and linking that capacity building. And

Page 15 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

this is especially with the working groups. And I'll give the
example of the Public Safety Working Group that's required to
be engaged in quite a number of GNSO PDPs at the very early
stage to ensure that the GAC does engage at the right time and
does provide comments within the timelines that are provided.
So I think it would be good to explore, perhaps if not now, we
don't have enough time, but this is something we really do need
to explore in terms of building capacity of GAC members to
enable them to meaningfully participate in some of the broader
ICANN work and early engagement of the GAC at that level. So
it's something to think about. And if you have ideas right now it,
will be good to share them.
And then the other questions are what other subjects to
approach as appropriate.

And one of the things that

(indiscernible) Anne-Rachel and Tarek and the rest of the team is
the dedicated regional work for governments. And this is, I
think, beginning -- we are beginning to see this happening in the
Africa region. And I would like to request for more, because we
are quite underserved, to use that word again, in terms of
participation of the Africa region, the South America region,
Asia-Pacific, in terms of just participation in some of the policy
work at ICANN.
So I think I welcome comments or your thinking on that.

Page 16 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

Thank you.

PARAGUAY:

Thank you, Mr. Chair. Paraguay speaking.
I would like to mention some things we're doing with ICANN in
our, in the South America region.
Basically, last year during ICANN 53 meeting in Buenos Aires,
Paraguay's national ICT secretariat signed an MOU with ICANN.
Two important items on this agreement includes, one,
supporting the global multistakeholder Internet governance
model, and striving to develop multistakeholder mechanisms at
national and regional levels.
And, two, supporting the development of the Internet domain
name industry in Paraguay, and in the region.
Since then, we are engaged in important open dialogues with
the local regional community and partners from other countries
to create the necessary capacities and consensus. In order to
contribute for the healthy future development of the Internet in
Paraguay, we are also supporting the creation of the Internet
National Commission of Paraguay, a national multistakeholder
organization to develop Internet public-policy in an inclusive,
bottom-up, participatory system of governance. Lead by ISOC
chapter in Paraguay and supported by the national ICT ministry,

Page 17 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

ICANN and LACTLD, we successfully organized many important
meetings that advanced in the development of a local model.
Now, regarding the development of the Internet domain name
industry in Paraguay and in the region, I would like to mention
that we are discussing the creation of a new element in the
pursuit of a healthy DNS ecosystem for a region. Latin America
and the Caribbean face very interesting challenges and
opportunities to explore in the particular sector of domain name
registrations. While our region concentrates roughly 10% of
Internet users around the world, a recent study conducted by
LACTLD and ICANN shows that just 2.7% of all domain names are
registered and operated in our region.
Moreover, few countries in our region show a penetration rate of
more than ten domain name registrations per 1,000 users, so
we're basically lagging behind, for instance, other countries
such as Netherlands, Switzerland, and Germany with rates of
355, 272, and 235, respectively, if I'm not mistaken.
In short, numbers show a huge growth potential for the sector in
the region, and I believe every effort counts to find a sustainable
way of overcoming this gap. It's about time to devise strategies
for the sector to flourish, and we are willing to help.
One specific idea is to support the establishment of a regional
DNS entrepreneurship center following the good results

Page 18 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

demonstrated in the Middle East through the partnership
between Egypt's national Telecommunications Regulatory
Authority and ICANN.
This ongoing project with over a year of operation is conducting
workshops and capacity-building events around the region. So
building on this experience and following the successful steps,
Paraguay's national ICT ministry would like to engage in dial hog
with the Latin American/Caribbean community to establish a
possible partnership to materialize a similar center in our region.
Thank you very much.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Paraguay.
Any more comments?
U.K., please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes, thank you very much. And thanks for all the presentations.
Anne-Rachel, thank you very much for recounting the work of
the Global Stakeholder Engagement Team. It's very impressive,
very wide ranging, providing a lot of focus on some key issues
and outreach to many important communities, and I'm sure it's

Page 19 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

having a lot of benefit in terms of building capacity, promoting
awareness, and creating opportunities for more engagement.
And I just wanted to pick up on the point that Alice raised about
participation in GAC processes and ICANN more generally. We
will be looking at diversity in the CCWG, the Cross-Community
Working Group Work Stream 2, and the participation of
communities in developing countries and small island
developing states I think is an important aspect of that. They
face many barriers and challenges. And we're well aware of
those, and they intersect with sustainable development and
achieving goals in that respect.
The way the GAC is working now I think is a helpful development
in this regard. We're working very much more intersessionally
with working groups on specific topics. As Alice indicated, this
creates opportunities for GAC representatives across the world
to engage in this important -- these important areas of work
online, through virtual meetings and so on. And if it's not
possible to attend an ICANN or GAC meeting physically, a lot of
those contributions intersessionally are going to sort of come
through in outputs from the GAC at physical meetings. So it's a
very important message to colleagues across the world that
there are many important opportunities to contribute to the
work intersessionally through the working groups.

Page 20 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

And that, I think, paves the way for governments to promote the
message to their stakeholder communities about how
effectively to engage in ICANN processes. It's not simply a
matter of seeing if you can physically turn up to an ICANN
meeting. There's opportunities to work intersessionally online.
And that's how ICANN does a huge amount of work.
So I think that's a key message from this discussion I think for us
to underline. And we should try and establish what kind of
problems, barriers exist that inhibit such effective engagement
through the working groups of GAC and also through other
ICANN community processes.
So looking at the problems and the barriers for engagement in
the underserved regions, for the small island developing states,
and so on, I think is a very important step. And I hope the
working group will develop the metrics and modalities for
looking at that problem.
And then when we come to look at diversity within the wider
post transition environment, we will be very much better
informed.
Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Page 21 of 33

Thank you, U.K.

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

I have NEPAD and then Peru.

NEPAD:

Thank you, Alice, and thank you to Anne-Rachel for the
presentation, and also to the work that this working group is
doing.
I just wanted to echo, I think, the importance in terms of ICANN's
regional outreach strategy and how that has actually helped
some of the work that we are doing.

We, similar to what

Argentina spoke about as far as the school of Internet
governance, we also started an Africa of school Internet
governance which is meant to actually raise capacity in terms of
awareness and understanding of Internet governance issues.
And ICANN has supported us in terms of being able to actually
sponsor participation, but in some cases also attending the
school and giving technical presentations.
What I wanted to actually talk about was to actually then, going
back to the idea of whether we actually need to have more
targeted regional engagement, especially with the governments.
I think that that is something that is very important, and that it
should actually be pursued.
My only comment would be that we then need to look at how we
actually link that with existing and ongoing activity so we don't

Page 22 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

create too many barriers and divisions between what already
exists and the new engagements.
Specifically, I think in terms of the school of Internet
governance, in terms of the African summit and other work
that's also ongoing, we need to find a way to make sure that this
engagement with governments is not seen as something that's
isolating itself from the other processes and that it is part of the
other processes.
I think also just to mention that in our engagement, we have
very strategically targeted the region economic communities
because they are the ones that actually would then interface
with the member states. And I think that when you now start
talking about the engagement with governments, it would be
very important also to ensure that the region economic
communities are part of that engagement as well as with the
member states as well.
Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you.
Peru, please.

Page 23 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

PERU:

May I speak in Spanish.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Yes, please.

PERU:

First, I would like to comment that in Peru, over the last few
months, this year, we held three seminars related to cybercrime.
They had been funded by ICANN and they have had very positive
results. We have been able to provide training to approximately
120 people who are directly related to cybersecurity issues. At
the same time, I would like to make a comment regarding
funding for the GAC and what I believe is part of the
commitment that GAC members undertake.
Approximately a month ago a teleconference was held. I think it
was led by Rodrigo De La Parra. He explained how the GAC
operates and he invited other Latin American countries to join
the GAC. It was a very good presentation, but at no point during
that teleconference was it mentioned that there is a possibility
for participation and engagement but also for having economic
or financial support. So I think that part of the commitment that
we undertake relates to providing funding. So I will take this
opportunity to insist on all members, that they consider this. I

Page 24 of 33

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

represent a country that is making a contribution. So I believe
that if Peru can do this, all of you can also do it.
And regarding Gema's presentation, I should say that it was an
excellent presentation, and the questions that are posed, the
countries that ask for the floor, in this case we should have more
diversity, a more pluralistic approach.

This is a topic that

concerns us all. And we had heard very interesting and welljustified and grounded opinions, but almost all of them on this
occasion came from countries that have had a very long
experience with Internet, countries that have highly-recognized
economic development. So next time that we hold such a
discussion and that several of us raise our hands, even if we
don't have enough time, we have to make sure that we can hear
all opinions, that we can have diversity of opinions. Denmark,
the U.K., Finland, Sweden, all of them are large countries that
have well-prepared representatives, let me say.

They don't

represent me. They don't represent my reality. In fact, I would
dare to say that my reality is more -- is more represented around
the world than their reality. So next time I would like to have
this opportunity to take the floor.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Alice, and thank you for the
presentations.

Page 25 of 33

I just want to also insist on one topic that

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

Milagros mentioned at the beginning of her intervention. This is
that, if we want to engage, if we want to empower GAC members
meaningfully, both in the GAC and its working groups and also in
the cross-community efforts that are ongoing, it's absolutely key
that we have a very strong secretariat. And this is a -- really a
key point in these efforts. We may benefit from the efforts
coming from the GSE, from other parts of ICANN, but to
empower ourselves, it's hugely important that we can benefit
from a strong secretariat based on the hybrid model we have
with independent policy support. And I think we really have to
make the link between the engagement, between the
development of underserved regions, and this aspect of our
work of the support for our interventions in the ICANN
environment. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. Tom, you had some comments.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Alice. Well yes, as a member of the proverbial strong
secretariat who I had mentioned, I just wanted to provide some
quick briefing advice to you on the run, so to speak. I think it's
helpful if the GAC remembers that when ICANN talks about
capacity building and a significant range of resources that they
devote to that, they mean, amongst other things, the

Page 26 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

development of national capacity and the development of a
Domain Name System across a whole range of stakeholders of
which governments are one. But ICANN is also consumed with
the capacity for registries, registrants, ccTLD, administrators in
some cases, a whole lot of industry players working across the
domain name sector in particular parts of the world. A technical
community as well, for example. So capacity building across the
ICANN community can mean different things. Not just specific
capacity building for governments.
In relation to developing capacity specifically for governments,
including the GAC, though, I just wanted to point out that
practical feedback to the ICANN staff and to the ACIG secretariat
is always welcome and if that's done quickly then often there are
ways that particular problems that countries have found can be
addressed very quickly without a great degree of planning and
effort but just a matter of simple communication. So I'm just
asking you if there are specific issues to do with anything from
the email list to meeting arrangements to any of the
technologies that ICANN allows the GAC to use, remote
participation which is what the U.K. stressed before how that
works and sometimes, you know, does not, language and
translation issues, all of those practical matters affect a lot of
GAC members in a very immediate way and sometimes it isn't
clear whether there's an easy fix for it. But often there is. So

Page 27 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

please ask, is what I'm saying. Please ask the ICANN staff.
Please ask the SLs in ACIG. And if there's a pattern in that
feedback then it's possible for even for a very large organization
like ICANN to respond and perhaps change systems and so on.
So people are listening, but it would be really good if you could
raise your concerns in the first place. Even if you think they are
minor ones or trivial ones, it's very important that practical
feedback is obtained. So thank you.
And finally, going back to my first point about that broader
capacity building agenda that ICANN puts a lot of effort into, and
as Anne-Rachel had mentioned that at other ICANN meetings
there are an awful lot of sessions dealing with this. Please bear
in mind that that's about a lot of things than just governments
but it does include governments, and this will come up again for
the GAC when you're talking about future gTLD policy. Because
one of the issues in looking at the last round of new gTLDs is the
role of the applicant support program for underserved regions,
whether that helped in encouraging applications for new gTLDs
from underserved regions. A lot of people think it did not really
do as much as it could. So that sort of broader policy issue is
going to come up again for the GAC as well. So just bear in mind
there's that big capacity building, if you like, and there are the
practical things that we as a secretariat would certainly like to
help you with. Thank you.

Page 28 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Tom. Iran, please.

IRAN:

Thank you very much. Just one question. In organizing the
arrangement for capacity building have you considered or ever
discussed in the regional, subregional group of country what
they need really or you take your blueprint program and just
present them, that is that. You have a (indiscernible) in region X
and now (indiscernible) in region Y. In other words, have you
matched the capacity building in terms of material to the needs
of those group of countries based on their requirements and
their reply but not based on your guess or guess of the people
who plan that. We believe that they need this. No. Perhaps if
we asked what really did they need? What are their priorities?
What are their issues that they need to have more information,
more -- and then has there been any follow-up actions for what
have been done or -- and/or using the same experience in the
subsequent capacity building. So this is something very, very
important. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Iran. That's a very important question and in fact
one that we're grappling with when we're mentioning -- when

Page 29 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

we're linking that to the regional government needs. But we
perhaps -- the underserved working group may want to conduct
a survey just to find out what the needs are, especially for
government members but also for members who are not
necessarily GAC members, for the purpose of outreach and
awareness creation.
There's another question, the last question, and then I'll have
Anne-Rachel and Pua, because we're running out of time, before
I hand it back to the GAC chair, please. Thank you.

BURUNDI:

Thank you very much. I'm a representative of Burundi, and we
have joined GAC a short time ago. I'm going to stress what has
been done about the capacity building programs.

In our

national registry we're wanting to have a capacity building
program. But as a matter of fact we need external experience to
that effect. Because of security reasons the experts could not
arrive in our country. And so I would like to know, and I'm
addressing these questions to Ms. Alice Munyua. Can you please
put us in contact with the people developing this type of
programs? Because in my country there's lots of people -- I
don't like to talk on behalf of other countries but in my country
there's lots of people needing this type of programs, this type of

Page 30 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

training. So is it possible to develop this program in Kenya and
in any other country?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

... from the inputs and questions.

To go back to Kavouss'

question about are priorities being taken into account, they
definitely are. When you look at, for example, what the global
stakeholder engagement team is doing in regions, we have a few
regions already where the regional strategy came from the
community. So in there, if you look, there is anything from
issues on country code top-level domains. For certain countries
this is a priority. Others have issues of, you know, how to build
their pool of registrars in terms of, you know, in country for their
ccTLD.

How to make their country code top-level domain

stronger. How to have the DNS industry in general stronger at
home or even, you know, how to get an IXP at home. How to
secure the government network and things like that. So we
don't simply impose on countries or communities, you know.
They -- just like Burundi said, they make their requests, and
requests are fulfilled as possible. You know, we -- you know,
there was a -- a little glitch in Burundi because there was unrest
in country and the internal training could not be done, but there
are trainings that are done, for example, for network operators,
you know, in different places and next one that will be done, you
know, for network operators at the DNS entrepreneurship center

Page 31 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

for sure Burundi can be one of them. Again, this is one where we
have to make sure that we do one with tailored also with the
language, you know. So we have to have enough who speak the
language who can come with trainers who can speak that
language, can deliver the trainings in that language to make that
happen.
So as possible we make sure that it happens. But we -- we really
do make sure that, you know, we take people's concerns and,
you know, priorities into account when we are doing things. And
that is reflected in the regional strategies in general. Thank you,
Alice.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much, Anne-Rachel, and thank you, everybody,
for the great questions, comments, and suggestions. We're
going be having a meeting soon with the government
stakeholder engagement team to dwell on some of these issues
you brought up with and come back to the GAC with a way
forward. So now I'd like to hand over back to the GAC chair.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes. Thank you. This is just to say that this is the lunch break.
As you -- as we've informed you, we have a GAC leadership
meeting with the ALAC in a small room. Not because we didn't

Page 32 of 33

HELSINKI – GAC Capacity Building Session

EN

want to have it with all of you but simply because there was no -logistically no other possibility. But we will inform you about the
exchange as quickly as we can. So enjoy your lunch and then -Olaf has a few bits of information for you, particularly with
regard to where to line up for the photos. Olaf.

OLOF NORDLING:

Thank you, Chair. All of you that have the opportunity, please go
to the piazza to have your photo taken. And the piazza, where is
that? Well, it's -- if you realize where is the registration area, it's
one flight of stairs. It's on level 2, just above the registration
area. So -- well, please line up there today or tomorrow or on
Wednesday, I believe.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So it's very easy. The piazza is between the trattoria and the
pizzeria and the gelateria shop, next to the church, of course.
Thank you.

[ Lunch break ]

Page 33 of 33

