HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 13:45 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good afternoon colleagues. My name
is Henri Kassen.

I'm co-chairing the operating principles

working group, together with Rajiv Bansal from India.
Two things. One is probably the effect of the "B" meeting. We
have been promoted to a day earlier. Normally in the normal
meetings, it's Thursday afternoons, and then the colleagues
appear to be very tired of the whole week of meetings, so
hopefully this one day that we want now will create some more
discussion.
And secondly, I have just been able to master all the acronyms in
ICANN for the past two years, and to my surprise now, with the
IANA transition, there's new acronyms that came up, one of
which is like "PTI," which in the region where I come from, that
stands for Pretoria in South Africa.
Now, this one seems to be "post-IANA transition" or "posttransition of the IANA," so I am learning to get the hang of all the
acronyms.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

Well, welcome back from lunch. We will, as the chair said, go
through -- or deal with the -- with another important aspect or
another important activity which has also been discussed in
relation to certain previous presentations.
I just wanted to check whether Mr. Rajiv has got some
introductory notes.

RAJIV BANSAL:

No.

HENRI KASSEN:

All right. Thank you very much.
Can we have the next slide?
That's the agenda for our brief discussion.
We have current status, where do we stand, which is a brief
background or brief indication. Then next steps and the draft
work plan. And as meetings normally go, there's AOB, but I will
leave that to the substantive chair of our committee.
Next slide, please.
The current status is that at Marrakech, we were -- after the
terms of reference were approved, we were just requesting the
secretariat to make a summary for us, a summary report

Page 2 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

outlining three main topics, and at this point I would like to
wholeheartedly thank the secretariat, Michelle, and the team,
Tom and Tracy and others, for their hard work in providing the
up-to-date summaries and the -- and keeping the discussion
going. Thank you very much. We appreciate that very much.
The three points is mainly we identified that they are as is
indicated, three main broad approaches that we need to take.
Of course the terms of reference indicates or says that we must
make a comprehensive review of the existing -- with the
emphasis on "existing" -- operating principles.
Then out of that, we looked at those three broad work streams.
One is that there is administrative changes or admin- -- yeah,
administrative changes required.
Secondly, there are principle changes required, substantive
changes required.
And then thirdly, we noticed that there are operating principles
that do not need much change or no -- that we do not need any
change to.
Can we have the second -- or the next slide, please?
That is the workflow sort of setup that we want to discuss the
flowchart.

Page 3 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

While we were doing our groundwork, we were then made
aware of the important issue of the new -- or the transition
process. On the -- is it now the right? -- or the left-hand side
there, we have basically two broad questions.
One, of course, is that the working group was formed to review
the existing principles, which does not include any of the
stewardship transition arrangements.
We have been -- so that remains a big question on the left-hand
side.
We determined that there is changes needed, because of the
new ICANN bylaws that was adopted, and it impacts on the
operating principles.

The major impact, of course, is the

empowered community decisional participant arrangements
that comes out of the IANA transition process.
We have these two broad work streams. One is that we have -we look at the operating principles for it to be reviewed as a
source document.
Then now we have now -- in terms of the progress of the process
of the transition, we have now received a new set of ICANN
bylaws that we also have to take account of, and the -- there is
this -- there is now the question -- I think the big question that
remains that has now come up is that what happens to the

Page 4 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

incorporation of the ICANN bylaws into the operating principles.
It will be incorporated -- it needs to be incorporated eventually,
but the terms of the -- terms of reference of the current
committee is to look at the existing operating principles, look at
that and do a comprehensive review of that.
With the transition arrangements now, we have the other work
stream that was discussed earlier this morning concerning the
empowered community, how do we go about that, do we -- do
we keep it as a separate work stream.
I noticed that Tom will be assisting us in making a sort of a
writeup and assessment of what the requirements would be
under the empowered community arrangements for GAC, and
then he was asking for a small team that can work with him to
assist him in doing the writeup or doing the analysis, and I was
just keeping quiet because I thought maybe at this point I can
now say that this committee should -- can be that team, but we
didn't see any members highlighting or showing their
availability, although I'm sure we are available because it is a
concern for all of us.
So this is the chart or the flow, workflow, that we are looking at,
and I think one of the major questions that possibly the GAC
needs to give us guideline on now is whether the transitional
arrangements and the new ICANN bylaws will also form a basis

Page 5 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

document that we will -- that we need to take into consideration
and then filter into our work plan for the reviewing of the
existing operating principles.
I just also wanted to note that there has been some very active
and extensive intersessional consultations by -- via the email list
that exists.
We have about 20 members that is listed as members of the
working group, and eight of them were very active in the past
few months.
Many thanks to them for enhancing and enabling the secretariat
and the committee to get a better understanding of the views of
the member states -- or the members as far as certain issues that
we need to look at.
So in terms of the workflow chart, then, on the left-hand side,
with the GAC as -- the GAC plenary would be -- feel that we
should take the ICANN bylaws that basically provides for the
empowered community, the decisional participant arrangement
and so on, to be factored into the current existing review process
that we have, that the committee have, because our terms of
reference do not include that, the new arrangements. Or, does
the GAC feel that maybe we will have to have a separate process
for that?

Page 6 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

That is possibly one issue that you members -- that the members
can think about.
Then in terms of the current review process, the current
operating principles review arrangements, we have three subapproaches or three approaches.
As was indicated earlier, there's the one of no change, which
basically is operating principles that is -- as I say,
straightforward, but not really, in our setting, but is operating
principles like Principle 5 that deals with that we cannot act on
behalf of ICANN, which stays; Principle 22, C/VC -- chair/vice
chair -- election process; like 29, time limits in meetings and so
on.
So those are principles that on the first reading does not really
need much revision and changes.
Then you have the second category, which is working group to
discuss procedural issues, which is -- which deals with principles
that deals with procedural matters.
Principle 6, the frequency of meetings once a year; or Principle 7,
how to call a meeting; and the notice of meetings, Principle 9,
and so on. So those are procedural issues.
And our view is also that should we get the green light to factor
in or filter in the ICANN bylaws changes or the new ICANN bylaws

Page 7 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

provisions, then many of the changes made may be procedural,
but that is to be seen still.
Then the third category is where we discuss substantive issues,
most notorious the operating Principle 15 and 16, voting rights,
membership, and so on.
So those are the three broad categories of approach or
discussion that we will have under the working group action
plan for the existing operating principles. Of course it goes into
the working group will then agree, and because of the
substantive and comprehensive processes and discussions that
we will have about this, we are actually also thinking of -- apart
from a -- from the mailing list, any decision on the mailing list
discussion, we're also thinking of maybe an intersessional faceto-face meeting where we will -- where we can discuss face-toface in terms of the agreement or of the issues that we need to -which we can agree on for submission to GAC for endorsement
or for further guidance.
India has indicated advice as co-chair that they are available and
willing to host such a face-to-face meeting for the group.
Then, of course, after the agreement at the working level group,
we will then submit to the -- to the GAC for endorsement and to
forge consensus on the issues, which then will lead to final draft
of the operating you principles for final approval by GAC.

Page 8 of 40

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

That is the current process. Of course the parallel one that is
indicated on the slide basically refers to the IANA transition or
the stewardship transition or transition process where we have
to

incorporate

the

issues

concerning

the

empowered

community, issues concerning what GAC's role will be. My senior
colleague, Mr. Covos (phonetic), has just indicated this
conflicting situation that we have, being advisory and but also at
that point take decisions. How will that work? The how and the
what will have to be discussed, and we'll have to get consensus
around that.
Then it will also then lead eventually into sort of a final
document, a final revision document of the principles for GAC to
approve eventually.
So that is the -- That's the flowchart that we have in terms of
where we are going.
Can we have the next slide.
The possible next steps for decision. Yeah, thank you.
First, the GAC to agree on new protocols, modalities of the
operating working group in response to ICANN bylaw changes.
And of course, will the working group continue with revision of
the existing operating principles?

Page 9 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

In the spirit of our democratic nature, we have a choice there,
yes or no. Every question has got a yes or no. But I suppose that
it will not be that (non-English word or phrase), as my colleague
from Germany will say. But let's look at that.
Of course the comment is always available, is there to and has
been tasked to deal with some of the issues.
So the first bullet is basically talks about, I think, as a relation to
the empowered community arrangement and some other
bylaws changes that came as a result of the transition.
Bullet three, then we agree that the operating principle should
review the process -- should review process substantive -- and
substantive issues in parallel. Two slides earlier I showed that
we have a three category -- approach in terms of three
categories. The one in where there's no changes foreseen, like
operating principle five where GAC cannot act on behalf of
ICANN. So that's the one. Second one is the process or the
procedural issues, like six, the frequency of meetings, and then
the substantive issues like membership. That the working group
develop a list, then, of substantive issues and decide in the order
to address each one.
The process issues and those that do not require changes, of
course we will also -- we will also develop a list of those, agree in

Page 10 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

the working group and then submit to the GAC for endorsement
or for further guidance.
Third last bullet, the working group co-chairs to prepare draft
work plan, including clear process for reaching agreement,
distribute to working group for agreement. That is now where
we felt that a possible face to face would be -- would be not
necessary but would be advisable to flesh out the final work
plan.
And then second last bullet, agree on the work plan, and then
send to the GAC list for endorsement by 1st of September 2016.
That's about two months before Hyderabad.
So the -- Because of the need, and I've heard this morning and
throughout the week that we -- and of course in terms of the
comments made in the working -- in the mailing list, also, that
we need to actively start doing and start planning and even, if
possible, start implementing some of the issues not to be left
behind. So that's why we are indicating that we can possibly go
through the GAC list for the endorsement instead of waiting until
Hyderabad, just to win some time, some more time there. So
when we get to Hyderabad, we can substantively, then, report
that we have implemented, you know, point one, two, three, or
so, on the work plan.

Page 11 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

And then the working group to proceed as agreed in the new
work plan, yes or no.
That is the questions that we would want to put in front of the -of the GAC plenary. And we can come back to that. It will
provide a fruitful source of discussion.
And then, of course, the last slide would just basically be
suggestions and discussion and deadlines, one of which is the
1st of September for the final work plan to be available and to
be -- to have been circulated to the GAC on the GAC mailing list.
I think at this point, I would want to ask the co-chair for any
inputs. That's fine.
Thank you very much. Should we leave the slide on for a brief
discussion? And we will then open the floor for discussion.
Thank you.
I have just said that the normal GAC meetings, this -- this session
normally comes after lunch on Thursdays.

Then everybody

thinks about tomorrow going home. Now we have progressed
to a day before.

We are now at Wednesday, at least, but

theoretically we are a day earlier but practically, we may not be.
So open for discussion, please.

Page 12 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

Thank you. Any comments will be welcome. Any advice, any
guidance. Especially as far as the first -- the first or the second
slide is concerned, how -- the broad approaches in terms of how
to factor in the transitional -- the ICANN bylaws and transitional
arrangements concerning the empowered community.

And

then, secondly, the approach, I think, in terms of the deadline
we have for the work plan, and then the approach that we want
to use the GAC mailing list for endorsement, which may be a -that's only for the work plan, not for a draft -- for a draft of the -of any operating principle.
Thank you. Any comments? Inputs?
Thank you very much. It appears as if you have unwavering trust
in the committee to continue and to further in the ICANN bylaws
arrangements as well as the, you know, come with suggestions
in terms of the work plan how we will deal with the empowered
community. And then we have one process -- with Tom, of
course -- one process. Bring both issues together, and then we'll
produce a work plan and incorporate everything going forward.
Thank you.
Back to you, Chair. I don't know. Maybe you can open the
discussion further.
Thank you.

Page 13 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

So could you just repeat?

EN

I'm not sure what

everybody has understood. Have we taken now a decision on
what to do with the potential requirements for amendments
with the accountability process? Or if you could clarify what you
just said before.

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you, Mr. Chair.
The suggestion from the committee is that we propose one
process, to continue with one process. If we have the ICANN
bylaws and the empowered community, we will, of course, have
to -- to take into account the work that is happening in the
CCWG, and so on, and so on. But in terms of bringing the issues
together, in terms of one -- one forum, like the working group,
bringing the empowered community or the ICANN changes or
the bylaw changes and the process as far as the -- as far as the
transition is concerned into the committee -- Remember in the
beginning, I said our terms of reference that we approved says
existing operating principles. And the EU -- EC. Is it EC or EU? In
the mailing list eloquently highlighted that this area is not
included in the terms of reference.

Page 14 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

But what is included is once we review the operating principles,
we will have to take account of the ICANN bylaws at the time.
Now the ICANN bylaws is updated and there's an empowered
community and a new process which is not yet final, we have
heard. It's still -- it's still -- The how and so on is still to be
worked out in terms of the empowered community, the detailed
processes. But the community itself, it is final, it is decided, it
will be there. It's just how ICANN, how the GAC will interface.
How, you know, the decisions in terms of decisional participant,
what will we -- when there's decisions to be taken, what is the
procedures that GAC will take concerning that. How -- In terms
of what operating principles will we act so we can get guidelines
and so on.
So as far as that is concerned, Mr. Chairman, the idea of the
committee is to bring everything together in the operating
principles committee and proceed, factoring in the issues
concerning the transition arrangement.
There is, of course, the danger -- now I'm shooting myself in the
foot, but there's, of course, the danger that we will be
proceeding with the operating principles to a point. Then we
see if one or two of the operating principles has got -- for us -- in
order for us to complete it, we need direction from the CCWG
arrangement. And then that one may take a year or may take six
months, and then we have to park this one and then go to the

Page 15 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

next one so that we can complete our review. But then we have
to come back to this one, to the one that we have put in
brackets, so to speak. And that may be a back and forth, back
and forth, and eventually it will -- the principles -- the principles
will not get final approval because of this outstanding issue. So - But in terms of the approach, it is our view that it's better to
bring everything together since we have the Operating Principles
Working Group, to bring that together in the committee and
then, of course, I have to get the final approvals.
And then, of course, the second thing was the issue of using the
GAC mailing list for endorsement by the 1st of September of our
action plan, our final agreed action plan by the committee.
Thank you, Mr. Chair.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think there are some people who would like to take the floor.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

Cristina Monti.
European Union.

HENRI KASSEN:

Page 16 of 40

(Off microphone).

European Commission, representing the

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

EN

Yes, right.
Just to share some remarks. Yes, in general, I agree with what
has just been said concerning the approach. It wouldn't make
sense for the operating working group to look at operating
principles that are not valid anymore. So, I mean, it wouldn't
make sense or we need to take into account the new situation,
the new institutional setup of ICANN. So -- Otherwise, our work
would be wasted.
How we do that, I think it's another difficult issue, but what you
are proposing to go back and forth in the discussion in the sense
that there are some items where we could make some progress.
On the other hand, others where we need to have broader
discussions at the GAC and see what is happened in the CCWG
discussions. But I think that already the fact that the working
group could highlight where these issues are and then maybe
also bring to the attention the actual language where we have a
problem and where this would need to be changed or modified
could help also advance maybe the broader discussions.
Because at least we would have some initial text to reflect on or
we would highlight where we would need to include new
language. So I think this could be a possible way forward.

Page 17 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

And then yes, I agree also in terms of continuing to work on
having a clear work plan ahead of the Hyderabad meeting.
Thank you.

IRAN:

Thank you. Perhaps I misunderstood. You said that bylaw, new
bylaw has not yet been finished. Which new bylaw has not yet
been finished? Are you talking of the bylaw of the CWG, they
have something they call the bylaw? Are you talking of article of
incorporation? Yes, it has not yet been finished. Or are you
talking of the bylaw which is called new bylaw? Which one has
not yet been finished?
And then I have a second point about whether we should engage
in two process. First, modifying the existing and later on, six
months after, come back again and modifying existing which
may be affected by the new bylaw. And my question would be
why we have two process? Why not we start something that
cover both with sort of the table. So could you clarify which
bylaw has not been finished in your view? Thank you, or the
view of the committee.

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you. And then Thailand. Or should I quickly respond?
The -- to the pertinent questions. Firstly, the -- the bylaw --

Page 18 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

maybe it was a slip of the tongue but the bylaws of ICANN has
been approved so there's new bylaws. It's approved. I was
referring to the processes involved in setting up and finalizing
the empowered community.

Those are there are still

uncertainties how it would play out. So that is what I meant, it is
not yet finally set up and cleared, as we heard this morning in
the -- but I was talking about the empowered community entity
or the group.
And then secondly, I -- I do think that as we said the -- the
European Commission also highlighted, it's better to have one
process and that we proceed not as two processes parallel. So
why two processes? As far as the -- the committee is concerned,
it's better to have only one. I don't know I'm going to debate.
Maybe -- yeah. Just to follow-up then, Mr. Kavouss, and then we
go --

IRAN:

Not on the question but on the process. Go out with other
people and come back and I suggest you something later on.

HENRI KASSEN:

Page 19 of 40

Thank you.

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

THAILAND:

EN

Okay. What I understood the challenge we are faced, I tried to
put the -- the transition aside. But the fact of PDP process that
happened a lot, I think we facing two or three issues. I fully
agree with Iran said, that the times, it's first challenge we faced.
And the decision or the times that PDP work in the process may
not in line with what the GAC operating principles. And we also
need to separate two things. Either we are part of the member
of PDP or is the PDP that we like to participate.

I been

experience three years ago when I start to work on PDP, one of
the very early PDP, and then the problem is we can participate
only as a -- the national that cannot even represent the GAC. I
think that the time for making the decision, that one of the
things we facing. And to be very concrete, the only way out from
what I do see is at first if you recall in our area and we been
appoint to work in CCWGs if you look into the GAC charters, term
of reference, or whatever you like to call, we need to start by
having us stop taking for what communique have been against
that context matter.

And that are the missing part in the

working groups document. So that communique is empowered
the member immediately at what scope and context they could
engage in which direction because that are the things that GAC
have a consensus already on how to working in that context.
Secondly, I think the process of issue scoping and providing the
alternative, I think if you look into the GNSO groups of people

Page 20 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

when they work on issue scopings and the document on their
charter, it's -- it's quite very clear that what is agreed and I think
here we can reflect that in operating principle, that when the
working group established if they can have this kind of -- if you
like to call substantial issues or issue scopings that if you are
engaged in these working groups what are the problems and
what are the alternative, possible alternatives, that were coming
out or need to make decision. And if that will be put in the GAC
discussion and then we keep -- we empower the working group
in that way I think it will be very helpful, rather than every time
you make a report you have to wait until you're coming back to
the all GAC member and seeking their opinion or some of the
time you want to send the answer to the question that coming
out from the other SO/AC, maybe the time is not allow us to do. I
think that I expect to see from revising the operating principle
and I don't think that we need to wait for bylaw anything. It's
just an internal GAC matter that how the working group
documentation should include and what is the process to
propose that document in the GAC meetings.

And so we

empower them to work at a certain guideline, a principle that
GAC advised them to do. In that way I think the member in the
PDP working groups of the other SO/AC would have more -more power to work according to what the GAC advised them to
do. Thank you.

Page 21 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

HENRI KASSEN:

EN

Thank you, Thailand. Yeah, I -- I think it's valuable contributions.
You have just highlighted an issue that we'll definitely -- we'll
have to take into account in terms of our work plan. We said the
basis documents for us would be the operating principles of
GAC, the new ICANN bylaws, and you have just highlighted that
it's -- it will be a worthwhile exercise also to do a stock taking
review analysis of the GAC advices.

That will also give us

guidelines what, you know -- what we have decided on in the
past. I also -- in terms of the new -- the transitional arrangement
and the new ICANN bylaws, there is a need for additional -additional principles to be added and that will -- will also be
indicated in terms of the lists that we will be developing of
substantive or otherwise issues, one of which is, I think noticed - we have experienced that the -- I call it the empowerment of
our nominees.

We nominate colleagues to represent us in

committees, and then it's a difficult issue to take decision there
on behalf of GAC because you have to come back to the whole
GAC to get the mandate, to get -- and so on. Whereas other SOs
and ACs, they -- they sometimes have empowered nominees
who just go there and then they can take a decision there,
mandated to take a decision.
So those are some of -- I think that's one of the new things that
we have identified, or that is identified in the list, in the mailing

Page 22 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

list already by some of our colleagues that is on the committee,
that we have to have some additional operating principles that
we will have to have. Thank you very much for highlighting -highlighting that in terms of giving us guidance going forward.
Any further comments? Come back to Iran? Jorge.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you so much, Henri. Just we're thinking about how to
reconcile the plan we are discussing here with the discussion we
had this morning on the empowered community. And I think
that there is, to a certain extent, a complementarity between the
two efforts.

To elaborate a little bit, what I mean is, this

morning, if I understood it correctly, we more or less concluded
that our independent secretariat would try to -- with the help, of
course, of -- of colleagues which may volunteer for this effort,
would try to map what is in the new bylaws on the empowered
community into what are the -- the needs for the GAC in order to
be able to participate therein. And then we would need to -- on
that basis, to reach agreements on the conditions of our
participation. So that's more on a level of substance and on a
level of general agreement between all the -- all the GAC
members. And then if we reach that step we would need to
implement these agreements. And that implementation may
require, to a certain extent, operating principles changes, new
operating principles in some cases, and in other cases we may

Page 23 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

live with working guidelines or practices as we have been doing,
for instance, for the participation of GAC members and CCWGs in
general.
So I -- I see there's a relation between the two efforts that first,
for this issue specifically, first we would need to do that exercise
of mapping, agreeing, and then seeing what are the -- the best
instruments to implement that participation. And when we are
clear about what are the operating principles that are needed to
be changed or to be added that would go into the working group
in order to implement that within the schedule of the working
group. I guess it was -- it would be surely very useful if the cochairs of this working group, of the operating principles working
group, would participate with Tom in this mapping exercise.
Just so we would ensure that all our thinking is consistent and
we don't create two separate -- two separate tracks. Thank you.
Hope that's helpful.

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you, Jorge. Yes, yes, thank you very much for the -- for
the good advice.
And, yes, we -- I did hinted -- I hinted in the beginning also that
there was a call at the previous session that maybe, you know,
some members indicated their availability to work with Tom to
do the mapping and so on. But then, of course, the working

Page 24 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

group or the co-chairs, as Jorge now indicated, as a matter of
necessity will work with them so that we can then assist in that
respect as far as the mapping of the issues are concerned
because it will eventually then come back into the working
group and it is a good suggestion. Thank you very much.
Tom?

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Henri. Perhaps it might assist the GAC if I quickly go
over a reaction from your secretariat to the broad conceptual
approach that you're grappling with here as a GAC because
these are complex issues.
The first point is to bear in mind that the operating principles,
while they're clearly important for the GAC, have no legal status.
They're not enforceable in any way. They're important for the
GAC. And, indeed, most ICANN supporting organizations and
advisory committees have similar informal but important
principles or rules of that type. But they don't have legal status.
The bylaws that -- both the existing bylaws that actually
establish the GAC, of course, and the new bylaws which will
establish a new framework for GAC and others to operate in are
quite different, of course. They do have, of course, the force of
laws. I just want to make that point firstly.

Page 25 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

And, secondly, looking back at the origins of this exercise which
go back, I think, to at least the Los Angeles meeting in 2014, the - there are two broad sets of issues here. One is the operating
principles that support now and will continue to support the
GAC's work as an advisory committee to the board, as everybody
has noted in the discussion this morning, that has not changed.
Significantly, there have been some bylaw changes about what
happens to the advice, as we know famously. But the GAC's core
role of providing advice to the board continues.
And the original purpose of this review of the operating
principles, I'd suggest, is still valid in terms of supporting and
making that role of the GAC as an advisory body to the board
work efficiently and fairly and transparently so that you are all
happy with it.
The second set of work which may or may not require
translation into operating principles, of course, was what you
started to discuss this morning. And these are the things the
GAC has to work through and which I've been asked to do some
further mapping and drafting of relating to a new role for the
GAC, which is not about advice to the board as such. It is about
participation in the community in some new structures. And
everybody's dealing with the same sets of issues.

Page 26 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

And I think what you're saying is that new role may also need
support through operating principles just as the GAC's current
role has always had. But it's important to try to map the basic
concepts first before delving into drafting operating principles.
So I guess I'm saying that the comments from Switzerland and
others concerning mapping, going down through the next level
of mapping after the briefing that we provided to you for this
meeting seems a sensible exercise. And I think the two issues
are complementary; and they don't fall each other in any way as
a matter of process from the secretariat, it seems to me. But
also in a conceptual sense, I'm sure the GAC can understand the
difference between the two sets of work that we're trying to do
here.
And all I can say is from our point of view, it's certainly possible
to support both. Please bear in mind that some of the issues
that triggered this review of the existing principles are still there
to be considered. And there is quite a bit of work in those. For
example, voting arrangements, who is entitled to be a member
of the GAC, definitions of consensus, for example, and the use of
consensus and other decision-making mechanisms and, indeed,
the fact that GAC advice is not actually defined in the operating
principles but consensus is. Those things are still important, and
it seems to me they are core business for what the GAC has
always done. But the new set of work, I think, can be dealt with

Page 27 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

in a way that does not cause much confusion, I hope, with that
existing task that the working group has. I hope that has helped
to clarify, but I'll hand back to you.

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you, Tom. You have mastered the ability to speak very
eloquently about issues. We get lost in your calm voice of
speaking, and then at the end we wonder have we understood
you correctly. But I'm sure we did.
In terms of the two processes, I've just been -- I've just been
noted -- I've noted that in an email earlier, the GNSO, I think,
also had -- also busy with a process of reviewing their principles.
And they have a specific activity called -- they are analyzing the
new ICANN bylaws as a specific activity so that they can then see
how it impacts and where it impacts their current system.
But our approach seems to be a meshed one where we're just
included because bylaws are there. It's just been updated in
terms of the new process. But it was initially intended to be a
bouncing board for reviewing our principles. So we will use the
bylaws, now the new bylaws, and still review our principles.
But thank you. I think the -- it will be of tremendous help if we
have, you know, an interim or a mini review analysis of the new

Page 28 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

bylaws that will then feed into the operating principles
arrangement.
May I give to Iran for return comments. Thank you.

IRAN:

Thank you. Before I make my comment, I see that we are now
delegating the responsibility of the entire GAC to the secretariat.
The secretariat provide us guideline, and we are following the
secretariat's guidelines. It should be reverse. We should give
guidelines to secretariat just to prepare supporting documents.
But ideas how to proceed should not come from the secretariat,
should come from us collectively.

They have their own

impression, very good. But giving the guideline how to proceed,
it is GAC. So we should quite clearly define responsibilities of
which are which. We may be busy, but doesn't mean that we
delegate the responsibility to others. Either the core -- the
chair/management team, they provide us the guidelines, we
proceed. Or the group. And secretariat only giving secretariat
support but not ideas to proceed this way or proceed that way.
But now I come back to my point.

Chairman, we should

concentrate our efforts to the areas which are urgent. You have
heard that there are PDP, at least three main categories which
are very, very important for us. And some of them will finish in
2018, beginning of 2018. If you open so many (indiscernible), we

Page 29 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

will not have any success. This is a strategic situation. The
people are limited.
If you ask five different area working, we cannot have five
people. They are very limited, one or two. So concentrate on
something which is urgent.
In my personal view, the operating principle to take account of
the changes of the bylaw at this stage is not urgent. Why? What
is the empowerment community? The empowered community
is if and only if the transition of stewardship is taken from United
States giving to the community. If it doesn't happen, there is no
empowered community at all. United States continue to have
the stewardship. So why we just rush into that situation and
does not wait until the issue comes that we are clear to this way
and that way?
The only thing, Chairman, I suggest we can do assuming that the
transition would take place, trying to have a table which are the
principles that we need, as you mentioned, not to change those
editorial change and those substantive change because of the
empowered community.
The remaining operating principle is not urgent at this stage to
change at all because we have so many important issues. We
have Work Stream 2 human rights, diversity, jurisdictions,
diversity, and so on and so forth, nine elements. We have all

Page 30 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

these PDP. We have this early involvement of the GAC and so
many things.
And opening another (indiscernible) of the operating principles
with the proviso that, yes, transition will take place which may
not take place. We don't know yet. And the issue we are doing is
exactly empowerment of community. If transition does not take
place, there will be no empowerment community at all. So let
us just take something very preliminary and very lightweight but
not go into the details. Otherwise, we cannot go to the area.
This is very important. Framework of interpretation of human
rights, that everybody was (indiscernible); jurisdiction, the most
important element if it take place.

I'm not proposing any

changes to jurisdiction. This is an important element to study.
So my suggestion would be, first of all, thank you very much. We
take a lightweight of what you propose, providing a table area
that does not need to be changed at all, area that change
editorial,

area

that

change

the

substantive

changes,

modifications, and calling for some comments and completing
that table and waiting for another three or four months to see
what happens in October. Thank you.

HENRI KASSEN:

Page 31 of 40

Thank you, Iran.

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

The comments are very helpful. I do -- I do -- and I think all of us
are in general agreement that we have to focus on the urgent
matters and try to streamline our work to get into -- into the
urgent matters, as you say, the PDPs and so on.
The bylaws as Thomas -- as Tom S. -- Thomas -- Tom indicated is
a legal document. And being from the legal fraternity, you will
understand that whatever changes is there makes it urgent for
us to include it into the bylaws but in our operative part. Some
of the aspects like the empowered community and so on may
still be a work in progress. Then we should just get ourselves
ready.
But there are some, maybe one or two, when we do the list, we
will be able to identify that the bylaws have been changed. This
is what the ICANN bylaws is. This is a law that needs to be
implemented yesterday when it was adopted. So we can't say
it's not urgent, but some of the issues are urgent.
But thank you for the advice and the guidance. I think it is
important that we prioritize in order to move forward.
Spain, please.

SPAIN:

Short comment. I want to support very strongly what Iran has
said as regards the role of the GAC secretariat.

Page 32 of 40

And as a

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

consequence, I would urge that people involved in this working
group really contribute to discussions.
And that a second comment, I'd like -- I'd like also to second
what Switzerland has said. It's a good approach to try to set our
lead staff of issues and to prioritize them and to say which we
are going to deal with in the first place.
In that regard, I suggest we start with the easy ones, maybe
electronic voting, and then go into more substantive issues.
As regards the adjustment of operating principles to the new
ICANN bylaws, the (indiscernible) has to be tackled, but I don't
see it is so pressing. It is, however, important so we need to
devote time to that issue.
But it cannot be something that prevents us from making
progress in this working group. Thank you.

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you very much, Gema. Yes. Thank you for supporting
what Switzerland and Iran say. The incorporation of all the
bylaw changes or incorporation of all the issues in the new
bylaws is not so pressing.

I think focusing mainly on the

empowered community arrangements and so on which is still
under discussion, the final points of that.

Page 33 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

So not so pressing because I see and I understand the rationale
behind that because, well, if I put my legal mind on, then I will
say, well, then the operating agree- -- bylaws are law, so that is
the pinnacle, that is it.
But looking at it in a broader sense and considering the
rationale, if we take that mechanical approach like we lawyers
used to do, then we will get into a -- at a point where that will
hamper progress with the rest of the review process.
So it's well taken note of, that the incorporation is not pressing,
is not pressing, but it's important, but it should not hamper or
stop us continuing to finalize our review.
Thank you very much for that guidance.
And of course the -- we also take note of the comments
regarding the secretariat. We have been -- our experience is that
they -- that the secretariat is extremely helpful and assists in
terms of preparing position papers and so on, and then
submitting it for our endorsement. So it's not entirely -- it's not
their views. It is views endorsed by either the chair, the co-chair,
or some of the GAC members that comment on the mailing list,
but it is well taken note of in terms of those comments.
Any further comments? If I'm an auctioneer, I will say "going
once," but I'm not an auctioneer, so I have the U.K. Thank you.

Page 34 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

UNITED KINGDOM:

EN

Thank you very much. On a slightly different angle to this, but
related, I'd just like to thank Tom Dale for the comments that he
made that I know the main focus and prioritization is around the
OPs associated to the bylaw changes, but when we're
considering how we prioritize -- and there are other things, other
elements of the operating principles, that we should look at -- a
comment that I made on the mailing list a little while ago was
how I was keen to see the discussion include the practices of the
working groups.
For instance, the length of the working group mandates, the
process for review, renewal, or closure of those working groups.
I think that would be beneficial going forward long-term in our
work.
And also, clarity over how co-chairs or additional co-chairs for
working groups are selected, replaced, or removed.
So maybe it might not be an immediate priority, given the work
that's going on with the transition, but it's something that
certainly I would be keen to see and may help sort of facilitate
our engagement in some of the PDPs, where the working -- the
working groups play an active part in preparing GAC positions.
So that was really just my thoughts on that.

Page 35 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

And I'd also just like to raise an additional observation more
broadly about the way the GAC works intersessionally.
I'm afraid it -- I don't really know where else in the GAC schedule
to make this comment, so I'll just say it here.
I recall that during the preparatory work for the GAC submission
on the DNS abuse report for the CCT review last month, we were
circulating Word documents on the GAC mailing list to prepare
the final comments for the GAC response. We inadvertently
ended up with several versions of the same document going
around, as people were simultaneously making amendments,
and as a result, the final document accidentally missed off some
contributions, some contributions for the U.K. I'm sure it wasn't
on purpose. But we sorted it out. It was all fine. And thank you
to the ICANN support and the secretariat teams for their help on
that.
But it made me realize that I think as the GAC, we can probably
utilize technology much more effectively in the way we conduct
our business, and as our workload is ever increasing and the
pressure on our time in these meetings is becoming increasingly
strained, that intersessional work becomes ever more
important, so any steps that we can take such as, you know,
using cloud-based apps for word processing, things like that,
simple measures, might really help us to move forward with the

Page 36 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

sort of -- with the pace and collaboration, you know, with which
we're able to work in the GAC.
So I'd just like to say I'd be happy to explore these ideas of how
we can sort of bring ourselves into the 21st century a bit more
with the way we utilize technology, so anyone interested, happy
to have discussions and work with the secretariat on furthering
some of those ideas. Thank you.

HENRI KASSEN:

Thank you very much, U.K., and I'm glad that the missing email
that you sent, or the U.K. sent, was found and sorted out.
And of course I -- coming from a region where I'm not quite sure
what cloud-based -- those technology things are concerned, but
I'll catch up. Don't worry. At least I'm so glad that --

UNITED KINGDOM:

It's this thing called Google.

HENRI KASSEN:

I'm glad that you are part of --

UNITED KINGDOM:

Do we know what it is?

Page 37 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

HENRI KASSEN:

EN

Thank you. I am glad that you are part of the committee. You
are registered, you are a member of my committee, so I'm in
good company. Thank you very much.
And then of course there are the practices of the working group.
We have spoken about the empower -- to empower our
nominees, and you have indicated -- you have now indicated
that you would want to see procedures for co-chairs election,
nominations, and further procedures of how the working groups
are working, and that is one of the issues that in the brief that
was circulated, at the end there are two additional proposals for
new operating principles, including, I think, one of those that
we'll deal with. Thank you very much.
We have reached our time slot. The chairman is already folding
his hands in -- I don't know whether he's praying that hopefully I
will not go over time or not, but any final comments before we
go up?
I must say: Very helpful. I'm sure my co-chair will agree that we
have -- we have received very helpful comments which will
definitely set us on a path to be able to get our work plan
finalized and get it to -- and circulate it to GAC for endorsement
as soon as possible.
With that, thank you very much for your participation and
inputs. I appreciate it. It's much appreciated.

Page 38 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

Thomas, thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Maybe just to make sure that people know where we
are and what the next steps are, I would just like to ask for a last
round of questions or whether everything is clear.
That seems to be the case, so thank you very much.
Just one element that -- to warn you. As we will have elections
in the next meeting, those who have been there two years ago
remember there was some dissatisfaction with outdated
elements in the election procedures. Unfortunately we have not
used these two years to modify these, so for those, for instance,
who will miss airplanes because of storms and other things,
there's no electronic way to vote and there is no procedure for
making sure that we have diversity among the vice chairs and
other things. Just to give this with you over summertime, when
you think about whether applying for one of the jobs or who to
elect, have a look at the voting procedures and the things that
ACIG will send out to us, and we have to do the best we can
based on the principles that we have to make sure that the
elections are fair and transparent and organized in a meaningful
way.

Page 39 of 40

HELSINKI – GAC Operating Principles Review Working Group Presentation to GAC Plenary

EN

There are still some gaps and we will have to cope with them
once more. I just wanted to highlight this because you will get
annoyed or angry at some point in time when you look into this,
why we have missed the opportunity to change it earlier. I just
wanted to flag this to you.
Okay. Thank you very much. So with this, then I think we have a
coffee break, and then we can go to the cross-community
sessions.
I see U.K., you have your pin up.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Thank you. Just an announcement. The commonwealth
meeting, the meeting for representatives of commonwealth
states of the GAC, and also it's an open meeting so stakeholders
from commonwealths can attend as well, that will start at 3:00,
so that's like five minutes' time, roundabout that, in Veranda 4,
which is on Level 0, so you have to go all the way down to find
that. It's at the far end of Level 0, and that will be chaired by
Shola

Taylor,

secretary-general

of

the

commonwealth

telecommunications organization. So at 3:00, in about five, 10
minutes' time, we'll start. Thank you.

[ Break ]

Page 40 of 40

