HELSINKI – Review Point for Communique Drafting

EN

HELSINKI – Review Point for Communique Drafting
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 13:30 13:45 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you all. We have to start. Time is running. We have
another very, very, very, very, very, very important -- I forgot one
"very" -- very important issue on our agenda, which is the
operating principles review, but before that, we get some quick
information by Tom about where we are with the draft of the
communique. Thank you, Tom.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Thomas. Good afternoon. My apologies, firstly, for
not meeting the commitment that I gave you in an email
yesterday to circulate a further version of the draft communique
last night. That did not prove possible because a number of
members are working very diligently on specific text.
So just to update you quickly where we are, with regard to the
text on our GAC advice to the board, which is the most
important, of course, we do have some suggested changes to
the advice on future gTLD policies and procedures. Not major
ones, but some suggestions, and they will be circulated shortly.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Review Point for Communique Drafting

EN

With regard to privacy and proxy services accreditation issues,
I've received some new text from the co-chairs of the public
safety working group to deal with that issue after the meetings
with the GNSO and the board.
With regard to advice on two-letter country codes at the second
level and mitigation plans proposed by registries, I now have
some new text that was circulated by -- or coordinated by Spain,
but with the assistance of a number of delegations, which will
also be included.
We're just waiting for some new text on the use of three-letter
codes in the ISO 3166 list. That may be a bit late coming.
And I've received and circulated yesterday some new text on
protection of IGO names and acronyms that was submitted by
the IGO coalition.
So all of that material is about to be incorporated in the next
version of the communique that will be being circulated this
afternoon. I can't be too precise about the time. I'm sorry. The
"B" meeting has thrown out everybody's normal ICANN body
clock and it's a little difficult to find time between sessions to do
drafting, but something will be sent out. You will see the text as
much as it can be brought up-to-date for this afternoon, and of
course by the time of the formal communique drafting session, I

Page 2 of 4

HELSINKI – Review Point for Communique Drafting

EN

think late tomorrow morning, you will receive an updated
version and of course a printed version to start with.
In the meantime, any feedback on the version that I circulate
this afternoon, feedback via email or to me, if you can find me
this afternoon, is of course much appreciated.
Thank you, Thomas.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much. Any questions or comments?
Yes. Thank you. Iran.

IRAN:

Thank you so much.
I sent a message in reply to what was distributed today, to Tom,
to Gema, and to seven or eight others. I hope that you have
received that and you have taken that into account.
Thank you.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Iran. Well, I didn't draft that material. I'll just include
the material that was sent to me by the drafting group. I believe
they did take into account the comments that you and a number
of other members submitted, but I don't have them here to ask.

Page 3 of 4

HELSINKI – Review Point for Communique Drafting

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

That will be part of the elements that are -- people are aware of
in the discussion, but it may not be in the text because it's not
coming from an originator of advice.
Thank you.
Other questions or comments?
If that is not the case, we will move to the agenda item Number
17, which is the operating principles, which is, as I said,
important, and I'll hand over to the two co-chairs of this working
group, Henri and Rajiv, from India and Namibia. Thank you.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 4 of 4

