HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 15:00 to 16:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

MARIKA KONINGS:

Hello, everyone. Can you please take your seats. We're getting
started now.
If you want to keep on talking, please do that outside of the
room.
So thank you all for joining us today.

This is the cross-

community session on next generation registration directory
services. I'll hand it over in a minute to the chair of the PDP
working group, but I'll just make some administrative
announcements or housekeeping announcements. Please note
that the microphones on the desks are not activated. We want
to give everyone equal access to participate, so there are a
number of colleagues in the room, you see them standing
throughout, who have microphones and numbers with them, so
when we start the discussion opening the floor, you just raise
your hand and they will come up to you and get you in the
queue.
We would like to encourage you all to log into the Adobe
Connect room for this session where you'll be able to see the

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

slides, but importantly as well, there are two survey questions
that are in there that we would appreciate your feedback on. It's
both for the leadership team here on the table to have an
understanding of what the level of knowledge of people in the
room is in relation to this topic but also for us to be able to see,
after the session, what the audience that participated so we can
also make an assessment of how to potentially do these kind of
meetings in the future.
Similarly, please download the meeting app if you haven't done
so yet. There's also an ability there to provide your feedback on
the sessions. And to note if the room gets full, there are still
seats up here for those standing at the entrance and throughout,
so please fill those up. But should we run out of space, there will
be an overflow, I believe on minus 2, the Helsinki Hall, from
which you can participate remotely, and we also will have the
ability there for people to ask questions.
I believe that was it for the housekeeping rules.
Yes, and obviously this is being recorded and transcribed, and I
am sure that has started. Looking in the back of the room. Are
we recording?
Yes. I'm seeing nods and hands up. So I think we're all good to
go.

Page 2 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Over to you, Chuck.

CHUCK GOMES:

Welcome to everyone. My name is Chuck Gomes. I'm the chair
of the registry -- registration directory services PDP working
group. And I want to again welcome all of you to this session.
We're the first cross-community session of this new model, so
this is exciting to look out here. I know a lot of people are
questioning this new model and the new meeting approach. I'm
one of those that is really optimistic about this new format
because the primary thing that ICANN does is policy
development. And the focus that's being put on that this week
and to have an opportunity for people who don't normally
participate in our working group join us in this session as well as
those of you who can join us in our working group session
tomorrow, is fantastic. And this session is going to be designed,
as much as possible, to have interaction. So please join us in
that.
I want to introduce the members of the leadership team. I
already introduced myself. On my left here is David Cake, one of
our vice chairs. On my right is Susan Kawaguchi, one of our vice
chairs. Another of our vice chairs is not able to be with us
because of a conflicting meeting, and that's Michele Neylon.
They come from each of the other three stakeholder groups in

Page 3 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

the GNSO. I'm from the Registry Stakeholder Group, and they're
from each of the other three groups, so we have a wellrepresented leadership team.
Now, very, very important to introduce the other two members
of our leadership team, because they are incredible, and we'd be
lost without them. And that's our two ICANN staff people, and
they're both on my right, aren't they? Okay. I can't see Lisa over
there. Lisa Phifer on the end and Marika Konings, who I think
people have known for quite a while. And Lisa, of course, has
been involved in the EWG work that occurred previously.
What I'd like to do very quickly, just by a raise of hands, nobody
is going to be asked to speak, but would those of you who are
working group members, not working group observers, I'll give
the observers a chance in a minute, but those of you who are
working group members, raise your hands, please. And leave
them up a little bit so people can look around. Thank you. And
let me tell you, these people are working really hard. So thank
you very much.
How about working group observers? Thank you. And we hope
your observing is going okay. But at any time, at any time that
you want to become a working group member, you can; okay?
Just remember that.

But let the leadership team know if

something is not working right there.

Page 4 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Now, and most important, how many of you are just visitors to
this session today? Would you raise your hands. Fantastic!
Okay. Yes. That's fine.
[ Applause ]
So with that said, we're going to try to give you a brief
introduction, and I'm going to turn it over to David to do the
introduction of our PDP. It's going to be brief. This is a very
involved PDP, so it's going to be brief. But feel free to ask us
questions later on and during the week, if you have other
questions.
David, it's all yours.

DAVID CAKE:

Hi. So my name is David Cake. I'm one of the vice chairs of this
group. As Chuck mentioned, we have one vice chair from each
of the GNSO stakeholder groups. I'm from the Noncommercial
Stakeholder Group and I represent Electronic Frontiers Australia.
So I'm just going to give you a brief introduction into what the
group's work is and what we're doing. I'm hoping at an ICANN I
don't really need to explain what, sort of, DNS or the WHOIS is,
but you may wonder what an RDS is because it's an acronym we
haven't used much before this group. It stands for a registration

Page 5 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

directory service. And the WHOIS, the WHOIS system, is an
example of a registration directory service.
At the moment, it's sort of the only one, but it's the one that we
have been tasked with looking at whether it needs to be
replaced by a different one, a next generation registration
service.
So when we talk about the IDS, there are some things we
specifically don't mean. There's some good terminology I think
it's SAC51 if you're really keen, but the gist of it is we don't mean
the protocol itself. Looking at the protocol, creating the new
protocol was a job for the IETF, and they've done that. They've
created a protocol called RDAP which is being slowly rolled out
to replace the WHOIS protocol.
But that doesn't mean -- there are several features of RDAP we
are not using, and one of the reasons we are not is because they
would imply changing the underlying directory service.
Now, when we say RDS, we also don't mean the data that's
already in there. The data that's in there, we talk about that's in
WHOIS, but we're generally talking about the big database, not
the database structure; the systems of how that data gets in and
out, who can access it, and all of that sort of thing. So that's
what we're talking about. That system of how the data gets
there, what data is collected, who uses it, what we use it for,

Page 6 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

how long we keep it for, all sorts of things, these are within the
scope of an RDS.
The work of this particular working group has a history, Chuck
mentioned the EWG, the Expert Working Group, which was
actually -- for short, which is actually the Expert Working Group
on a new registration directory service, I think, was its full title.
Now, that was a working group that most of you have probably
heard of. It was not a working -- well, it was an expert group. It
wasn't a working group. So it wasn't a group put together from
the -- directly from the ICANN community the way most sort of
GNSO PDP working groups and so on are. It was a group put
together by the Board with experts from within and outside
ICANN to look at what we could have instead of the current
WHOIS. How would we -- If we -- WHOIS has a very long history.
It goes right back to, like, the '70s. What would we do if we were
to create it now? Or what would be an example of such a thing?
They produced a very big report. That big report had a lot of
hard work put into it by some very smart people, but there were
some things about it that meant it was not going to be picked up
and used as it is. It was not a community, you know, bottom-up
driven process. It had some people dissenting with some parts
of it. But it certainly proved that it was possible to, you know,
replace WHOIS in theory, and that there would be some, you

Page 7 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

know -- quite likely, some considerable advantages, potential
advantages, in doing so.
So this working group has been put together to look at -examine specifically that report as part of our -- it's in our
charter that we have to look at the work that was in that report,
but also, everything else to do with registration directory
services, most of which in the form of WHOIS reviews and SSAC
reports, and any other work which is relevant. So we've done an
enormous amount of data gathering so far.

Absolutely

enormous. It's been a huge task. And we're currently -- The
work is also so big that we had to put together a special Board,
sort of, GNSO working group just to work out how big -- how
we're going to deal with this huge task. Like this a bigger task in
terms of being given to a PDP than practically anything ICANN
has ever tackled. It's an enormous -- I mean, we have just done
the IANA transition, and so on, which is an even bigger job, but
this is still a pretty huge job, and so we had to sit down and work
out how we're going to -- we had a special process to work out
how we're going to tackle it. And they said, well, we'll split the
work up into phases. So Chuck will give you a lot more detail.

CHUCK GOMES:

Page 8 of 49

It's right there.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

DAVID CAKE:

EN

But the important thing is we're currently in phase one. The
purpose of phase one is, in essence, to determine if we need a
new RDS at all.
The EWG proved that it was possible to design one that looked,
you know, as if it would have some advantages and
disadvantages relevant to WHOIS, and it certainly would be a lot
more modern. But it didn't determine it was not a community
driven policy, bottom-up policy process that said we needed
one. So that is phase one of our work. Do we need one?
So we are carefully gathering requirements, looking at what the
requirements would be for an RDS if we designed one now,
working out if WHOIS, in some form of the current system, could
be sort of dinged around, modified here and there, but basically
suit all those existing requirements, or will we say, no, if we're
going to have a working modern system that satisfies all the
needs of ICANN going on into the future, will we need to base it
on some different underlying technology and assumptions.
Some of those may be things we haven't even discussed yet.
Some of those are fairly obvious. One of the obvious ones to
most of the I think -- that's already formed sort of discussion in
parts of the community is the RDAP protocol allows for
differential access. Instead of making all data public it can make
some of it gated and some of it accessible to only certain people.

Page 9 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Will we make a system that uses that feature? Is that essential -if that's an essential feature, we may need to change a lot of
things about how we go on with an RDS. We may decide that's
not an essential feature and we can proceed on a different basis.
We're in the process of doing that now. We -- as a result of the
data gathering we have an enormous list of requirements. Sort
of almost unmanageably large. We're hoping not quite, but, you
know, it's -- it's certainly huge. Which we've gathered not from -not just by, you know -- we've gathered by looking at an
enormous number of documents that discuss WHOIS, the new
RDSs as presented by the AWG.

Lots of -- some external

documents about things like data protection law. Huge number
of things. And input from SGs and ACs and constituencies and so
on. So that's more or less where we are now. That gives you
some background of how we got here and this sort of size of the
task. What things are in scope and what things are out. And
there anything I've forgotten?

CHUCK GOMES:

About phase two and three.

DAVID CAKE:

Right. So phase one is to work out how -- whether or not we
need a new RDS. We will present a report towards the end of the
year that will -- hopefully, which will then go to -- you know,

Page 10 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

there will be an issue report that's distributed to the whole
community. It will be presented to GNSO Council in the normal
manner of a GNSO PDP, and we expect that will -- there will be
some discussion on the -- once we present that report there will
be some discussion in that community. But it is only that one
decision -- ultimately the primary decision of that is that do we
need a new RDS or not. We will -- part of that report we will be
presenting the requirements that we perceive for a new RDS
which will form our explanation of why we need a new RDS.
There will be certain -- you know if there are -- or not. So we will
be clear on which particular requirements commit us to
changing or we discussed and then we move on to phase two.
Phase two we really start talking about well, okay, if we need a
new RDS, what are we going to do about it? What form is it
going to take? We're going to do design work on it, that is a -- we
have a magnificently complicated and alarming looking diagram
about how much work we have to do on that task. We need to
consider a huge number of issues. We need to consider, you
know, all the technical issues and practicality. We need to
consider how -- how it would require changing, you know, ICANN
business

processes.

We

need

to

consider

technical

implementation. We need to do risk assessment. All of these
sort of tasks that you would do as part of design.

Page 11 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

And then, phase three, we need to think about how to make this
actually happen. Which is a long way off but --

CHUCK GOMES:

Thanks, David. So this is Chuck speaking again for those that
may be on audio only and not in the room. Go back to slide
number five very quickly, please. And I want to make sure you
see the phases that he was just talking about. We're in phase
one, identifying possible requirements for a new RDS system, if
we decide that one is needed. And I know that question may
sound kind of funny to some of you. Bear with us, okay? This
whole charter has been laid out very carefully. Phase two will be
the actual policy development work to fulfill the requirements.
And phase three, as David just said, implementation and coexistence with the existing WHOIS system. Phase two and three
may happen concurrently, at least to some degree.

That's

where we're at now. Let's quickly go to slide six, and this is all
from our charter and from the work that was prepared. I'm not
going -- we're not going to go through that in detail. But there
are 11 areas there that there are possible requirements for that
we will identify and then you can see the same areas apply to
policy development implementation.

Going ahead to slide

seven, very quickly, the one that was up there just a little bit ago.
We're going to try to reach consensus in the working group when
we deliberate on each of those 11 areas that you saw in the -- the

Page 12 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

previous slide. So what we're doing right now is working on
these fundamental requirements. Okay? And we have, as David
said, created a huge list of possible requirements. And one of
the things we're going to ask you to do today is to suggest
requirements that you think we should have in there. Now, we
may have those already, we may not. We'll sort that out later.
But to ask you or expect you to be able to compare our list to the
ones you're thinking of would be unreasonable because it is a
very large list that we have come up with. And we're still
working on ways to attack that list.
David kind of covered these cross-cutting questions, the
fundamental requirements that we have to do, in phase one.
And you can see that in front of you right there. I won't read that
for you. But the -- what I'd like to do right now is just -- and
we're going to have some people share some examples of
possible requirements and then we'll give you a chance to do
that later.
But first, before we do that, let's go to our second agenda item, if
you can scroll the slides. And go ahead and scroll one more.

DAVID CAKE:

And Chuck did say we can't -- we can't, you know -- we have a
huge list of requirements. We can't compare everything. But the
other thing you can do is send us documents you think we may

Page 13 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

not have considered for us to look and try to extract
requirements from. We've done a lot of that.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thanks, David. And that may become a little more clear as we
move forward. Susan, it's your turn to talk about the work plan
and the near term opportunities.

SUSAN KAWAGUCHI:

Thank you, Chuck. So you can see from the slide the PDP work
plan is fairly involved and I must say Chuck and Lisa and Marika
put a lot of work into this. And we've moved our way down to
we're currently working on 9-11. So it's the informal outreach,
finalizing initial possible requirements and decide how to reach
consensus during deliberation. Then we'll step into step 12
which is actually deliberating all of these possible requirements
and coming to agreement -- or disagreement -- on what should
be required. So -- and then you can see we have it laid out for
the rest of the year on what to -- you know, what our work
involves. And if you could forward to the next slide, please. I'm
not sure if we have control of the slides. Okay. Thank you.
So we've already had one formal early outreach stage, and we
reached out to the community and received responses. So the
working group is reviewing those along with all the other work.

Page 14 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

And currently we're in an informal outreach period that ends
just tomorrow? June 28. I've lost track of the date this week.
And so if you have input, we'd be happy to receive that, too. And
then we'll -- we're planning on additional outreach and then a
public comment period once we draft the initial report for phase
one.
The biggest thing to know is we are in phase one, and we will
stick to that. And we need everyone's input to build this system
or to make the decisions on this system.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thanks, Susan. Chuck again. And I want to comment on our
deadlines or our target dates in our work plan. I think everybody
-- hopefully everybody in the working group and even the
observers understand this, but when we set deadlines, we're
fully cognizant of the fact that they're not real firm deadlines.
We have a target by tomorrow of finishing off this list of possible
requirements for an RDS system. But we're fully aware of the
fact that we're going to discover more requirements after that
date. That's okay. This is going to be a very dynamic process
because we will learn as we go as things begin to come together.
So I want all of you to understand, these deadlines are
important because they help us manage our work and make
progress, but they're not so firm that we can't make changes as

Page 15 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

we go and as we see fit. So with that said, let's go to the next
slide and the one -- get into agenda item three which is where
we want to spend most of our time today.
You can see the first bullet there that we're supposed to -- and
Susan talked about this, we're supposed to establish, if we can,
reach consensus, on all these requirements that we're going to
come up with. Okay? And so the second bullet there just
indicates an area where we're -- we're collecting right now -we've been collecting for a couple of weeks. Our working group
members have reached out to the groups they represent and
asked for additional requirements, and hopefully those will
come in by today, from any groups that have them. But we're
going to ask you to help us do that today, and we're just going to
open it up to possible requirements for an RDS system. And so
we will do that. Let's go to the next slide because this will help
you, and I want you to focus on this slide because these five
areas are the first five areas we're going to focus on and really,
we're going to start off in the next few weeks and months
looking at three of those areas kind of together because it's hard
-- it's difficult to decide which one to do first. They're very
interrelated. So we're going to especially look at users and
purposes, at privacy, and gated access -- excuse me, and -- I
misspoke, data elements. So the top three up there are the
three we're going to start deliberating on first. Not in any

Page 16 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

particular order. We'll probably go back and forth because they
are interrelated and interdependent. So -- and then we will later
then also deliberate on requirements for gated access and
accuracy, and then the last six questions, which are all
summarized in the royal blue box there, cross-cutting
questioning.
So as you're thinking of questions -- and we'll put this back up a
little bit later for you to see -- but we're going to ask for some
possible requirements on those things. Next slide, please.
To get your minds thinking, here's some bullets here that will
hopefully do that. What possible requirements must a new
policy framework for gTLD registration data and directory
services address? Where does WHOIS -- where does WHOIS fall
short today? So you may think of a requirement, oh, WHOIS
doesn't do this, it needs to be this, this should be a requirement.
What requirement should a new RDS policy satisfy? These are all
just to get your minds thinking ahead here so that you can
volunteer some of those.
We are seeking really a broad spectrum of real-life examples, so
please feel free to do that. We're going to have to ask you to be
very brief and concise in what you share because we have so
many people in the room and we have a limited time frame.

Page 17 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Now to get it all started, we have some working group members
and Lisa also, in fact, and Susan as well, who are going to share
some examples. And so let's go to the -- the next slide, and don't
focus on these yet. Lisa will cover these in a minute. I'm going
to give Jim Galvin a chance right now and if -- you have a mic
right to your right there, Jim, and you can come out front here so
people can see you better. Okay. And he's going to share an
example from one of these areas. And, in fact, scroll to the next
slide so you can focus on the area that he's talking about and he
can refer you to it. Go ahead, Jim.

JIM GALVIN:

Thank you, Chuck. Jim Galvin from Afilias. I also happen to be
vice chair of the SSAC. But I want to focus on the top one up
there, the registration of data elements and suggest that a
possible requirement for this particular PDP working group is to
answer the question, what is the purpose of registration data.
And by way of discussion, I just want to offer to the group to
think about that I want to carefully draw a distinction between
the fact that data is displayed today and exists is not the same
as answering the preceding question of why we need that data
at all and for what purpose, you know, for who's going to use it
and why they're going to use it, and then, of course, what data
you need to collect in order to meet that need.

What's

important here in this discussion is that the Expert Working

Page 18 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Group that we had that we saw in the slides earlier, if you read
that report, when that expert working group director of services
spoke before, they did an outstanding job of cataloging all of the
reasons that -- or all of the purposes that WHOIS data, the data
that is displayed today, is currently in use.
But the distinction I want to draw is that's not the same thing as
why we collect it in the first place, and I think that particular
question is probably one of the most important questions. Is
domain name data collected, should it be collected, should we
continue to collect it, to meet all of those purposes for which it's
being used today. And that's different than stepping back and
asking the general question, the very specific question in some
ways of what the community really should have and what is the
community willing to support going down the road.
So what is the purpose of registration data? I believe that's a
foundational possible requirement question that the output of
this group should clearly speak to. And that's different from the
question the Expert Working Group answered.

That's my

comment.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much, Jim. And those of you out there who are
going to volunteer some possible requirements aren't expected
to give all the background like he gave, but to state the

Page 19 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

requirement; okay? And we wanted him to give some of that just
to see the whole picture.
Now, notice we keep saying "possible requirements."

It's

because we haven't started our deliberation yet. We haven't
started trying to reach consensus on requirements.
I hope some of them are easy. I know some of them will be hard
to reach consensus. And we'll have -- take a lot of time to do
that, all the time we need to do that so that we really can reach
some possible requirements.
Next I'm going to call on Beth Allegretti. Where is Beth at?
Go ahead. She's going to share another possible requirement.

BETH ALLEGRETTI:

One of the other requirements for a registration directory service
is access, who you -- who and how you can have access to that
data.
For example, I work for Fox Entertainment Group. I manage a
global domain portfolio, and I access WHOIS to actually verify
our own information. So I use it all the time to ensure that other
information is correct. If we acquire a new business unit, I will -and they may not know what domains they own, I will use

Page 20 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

WHOIS to pull all their domains together and bring them into the
corporate portfolio.
So one of the possible requirements is access to that data, how
you can get it, who has it, and when you can get it.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thanks, Beth. And then let's go to Susan to share a requirement.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

One of the requirements for my work as managing a global
portfolio for Facebook is accuracy, accuracy in our own data. I
access the data to make sure that our data is accurate, but also
to ensure that third parties don't use our data. It's my data, our
company's data is only accurate for our domain name
registrations.

Not for someone else's domain name

registrations, which happens more often than you think. So
accuracy is a requirement.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thanks, Susan. And then if you flip, go back one slide, please.
And, Lisa, why don't you talk about this slide.

LISA PHIFER:

Page 21 of 49

Thanks, Chuck. So this is Lisa Phifer, for the record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

And just to give a few more examples.
I think that Jim actually already covered working from the
bottom of the slide that there's a critical name for a policy that
asserts what is the purpose of registration data, and that
actually came from a SAC report. And that would be an example
of the kinds of topics that you all might wish this working group
to address as part of possible requirements examination.
Some other examples, though, would be things that you either
like or don't like about today's WHOIS system. I know many
people have concerns about today's WHOIS system. In fact, the
possible requirement given here that WHOIS lacks some
mechanisms for access control integrity and confidentiality to
many is perceived as a shortcoming of the existing WHOIS
system and a possible requirement would be to address that.
You could look at that as a privacy requirement or you could
look at it as a requirement to provide some level of access
control beyond the current system, which is all public access.
Another example given there in the middle is expectations that
you might have on a new system. If you were going to start
designing a new system today, not constrain yourself to what's
in WHOIS today, what would your requirements be on such a
system.

Page 22 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

An example of that from the EWG report is that possibly the
registration data that is provided through a directory service
would only be provided for a set of purposes that would actually
be defined through policy and that we wouldn't, through the
registration directory service, any longer just make all data
available to all people for all reasons. So that's an example of a
possible requirement. Whether it ends up being a requirement
that's recommended by this working group of course is still to be
discussed, but those are just a few examples.
And you'll note that these examples all come from a document,
and that's the way this working group has approached the list of
possible requirements so far, is actually starting from all the
work that's been done in the past on this subject, all the
positions that were stated by various groups on this subject, and
trying to draw from that history what possible requirements are
already on the table, and then work from there.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much, Lisa.
Now it's going to be your turn. And I'm really talking to the
guests that are here today, or it can be working group observers
since you don't normally get to participate either.

Page 23 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

I'm going to ask the working group members to refrain because
they're going to have lots of opportunities, and most of them
have already contributed requirements.
So again, let me ask you to be very brief. State the requirement,
because we're -- and speak slowly enough because we're going
to try to capture these and show them on the screen; okay?
And then we have the mics around, and put the numbers up for
the mics again. Okay. And let's start over here number four -this area over in here.

Do we have someone who has a

requirement you would like to suggest be a part of this system
as a possible requirement? Anybody in area four? Right here,
right up front. And we'll come back to this area. I'm going to
rotate the areas as we go around.
Go ahead. And would you please state your name and your
affiliation, if there is an affiliation, and then state the
requirement.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Good afternoon.

My name is Gema Campillos.

I'm a GAC

representative with Spain.
My requirement could be a (indiscernible) or uniform
presentation of data across all registrars or registries, and
access to law enforcement authorities, including --

Page 24 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

CHUCK GOMES:

Let me just interrupt. Did you just give two requirements?

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Two requirements.

CHUCK GOMES:

Just let me know if you're doing more than one. That's okay, but
so that they capture it correctly.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

The second one is access for law enforcement authorities. If
possible, to consult the history of registration of domain name.

CHUCK GOMES:

And is that a third requirement?

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Well, yeah.

CHUCK GOMES:

Okay. I just want to make sure we capture it accurately.
Thanks. Very much appreciated.

Page 25 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Let's go -- And we'll come back to this region -- region or area of
the audience. Let's go to area five back in the back part of this
section. Is there anybody? Just raise your hand, please. And
you guys -- okay. Good. Go ahead.

MALCOLM HUTTY:

Thank you. Malcolm Hutty from LINX. And I'm not going to
recommend this as a requirement, but I would like the working
group to consider whether it is part of the requirements to
ensure that nobody can register and use a domain name without
there being an available and traceable person who can be held
accountable for the use that that domain has been put to.
I think that that cuts across some of the requirements, but I
hope that the working group will consider that question
explicitly, and will also consider that if the answer to that is yes,
is it actually part of ICANN's purpose and part of what ICANN
should be doing to seek to achieve that outcome.
Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you, Malcolm. Very much appreciated. Did we get all
that?
Okay. All right. Very good.

Page 26 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Let's go now to area three in the back over here in this section.
No. Oops. None in that section. I can't see real well. So area
two, over in here? Here we have a hand. Great.

THOMAS DE HAAN:

Thank you.

My name is Thomas de Haan from the Dutch

government representing Netherlands in the GAC.
I wonder if this is a requirement or possibly also a legal imposed
requirement, but I would say translating, let's say, the spirit of
many data protection laws around the world. I would say the
basic requirement is that users who give data to third parties or
whoever should know for exactly what purpose -- in anticipation
of giving this should know exactly for what purposes, to whom it
should -- it will be given.
Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much.

And I actually think that is a very

reasonable possible requirement that we're going to need to
deliberate on. So that's very much appreciated.
And then I think we have area one. I'm not sure how it differs
from the others, but we have a person here, so....

Page 27 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Thank you.

EN

I will speak in English because we have

interpretation services.
Again, I will speak in French because we have this in
simultaneous interpretation system.
Thank you very much. My name is Sebastien Bachollet. I would
like to make two suggestions. First, as an individual user, when I
am using a domain name from a personal perspective, I wish my
data would not be available for all marketing companies around
the world because they will populate my email with their emails.
And when I buy something in a Web page, I would like to be able
to access to that information regarding the Web page being
used, the responsible people, if it is the company I am looking
for, whether I am accessing the real company in that Web page.
Thank you very much.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you, Sebastien. Much, much appreciated. And I see we
have another hand back in area five, and I'll come back up here
to four in just a second.

DAVID HUGHES:

Hello. My name is David Hughes. I'm a member of IPC. And a
requirement I'd like to touch on is that earlier somebody had

Page 28 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

talked about the access by law enforcement, but there are a lot
of third parties who have legitimate reasons, especially if they
feel their rights are being infringed upon, that they also need
access to the data. And I think that's something that needs to be
on the list as well, please.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much. That's appreciated. By the way, just to
make this a little fun, okay, how many of you, if you were on the
working group and were deliberating, would support all of these
requirements? Raise your hands.
We've got a few.
Now you see the work that the working group has in front of it.
Okay. These are all real legitimate things to consider, and we
have, on the working group and in the whole community, lots of
different viewpoints, competing viewpoints.

And we as a

leadership team, and me in particular as chair, gets to try and
help us come to consensus.
But thanks. Let's come to area four for the next one.

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

Yes. Wanawit Ahkuputra, Thai, GAC. One of the requirements is
that as we are not using a Latin base, or let's say ASCII, the issue

Page 29 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

is the translation and transliteration of the data elements which
each would require in the NGRES as we used to conduct the PDP
on translation, transliteration, on contact information, and also
on the address information inside which when you don't use the
ASCII as a local language, the meanings of the information is not
-- is not there.

CHUCK GOMES:

Very important requirement that we're going to have to
consider.
And, by the way, that brings up an interesting point. And that is
that there are several other working groups on WHOIS that are
going on or that have recently completed at least their policy
work that we're going to have to coordinate very closely with,
including one on translation or transliteration of registration
data. So we will be working hand in hand with those other
working groups.
Next one. Three? Okay.

ANNE AIKMAN-SCALESE:

Hi, Chuck. It's Anne Aikman-Scalese with the IPC. And this
relates to trademark clearinghouse notices and kind of a
screening process that we go through when we receive a notice -

Page 30 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

- an I.P. claims notice with respect to a registered trademark.
And we receive that notice for our clients.
One of the pieces of the analysis that we perform is we go to see
who is the registrant. In many cases, this completely eliminates
any problem, any need for further action because we can see
where that registrant is, what their business is, and, therefore,
we can advise the client this is not an area of concern.
And I have to tell you in the vast majority of I.P. claims notices
that we receive, I'm going to venture in our case maybe 60, 70%
any further problem or investigation is eliminated. So if I cannot
find out that information for clients, then, you know, I have to
take a risk-averse position finding another way to investigate
much further to make sure there is no infringement risk for the
client.
So if -- unless I can get an access based on a TMCH claims notice
to the relevant information, it could just cause a lot of
unnecessary measures. Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you, Anne. Much appreciated.
And 2.

Page 31 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

NIGEL CASSIMIRE:

Good day, Chuck.

EN

My name is Nigel Cassimire from the

Caribbean Telecommunications Union. We are a GAC observer. I
think for any registered domain, there should be an
administrative contact, a technical contact, and the information
should be publicly accessible with -- and as -- and as of date.
This is the technical contact as of this particular date, and this is
the administrative contact as of this particular date.
The other requirements that people mentioned about searching
in the past and so on could also be valid. But I think for each
valid existing Web site, that should be the minimum. Technical
admin, publicly accessible as of a particular date for each one.
Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much.
Over here to one.

STEFANIA MILAN:

Thank you. My name is Stefania Milan from the Noncommercial
Stakeholder Group. And I would like to offer a slightly different
perspective.
Instead of adding to the list, I would suggest to subtract
something. So operate under the principle of minimizing the

Page 32 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

data that we have in this database. And as a contribution, I
would suggest to remove some of the data that's particularly
there, and in particular the address associated with individual
registrants because this is potentially harmful for dissidents,
blogger, journalist as well as many civil society organizations
exposing them to additional and real unnecessary risks. So I
would like the working group to consider also these aspects.
[ Applause ]

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you. Now, let me add a little caution here, okay? I
appreciate what you just did and what you shared. But actually
what you're doing is you're getting into our deliberation phase,
okay, when we're going to decide whether -- and we will
probably eliminate some of the possible requirements.
If I allow others to do that, this meeting will be lost, okay? So
fully respect and appreciate your input. By the way, I've had to
do this oftentimes already in the working group: Hey, guys, you
are getting ahead of the game. We are going to deliberate on all
these. And some of them are going to be hard, and there are
going to be disagreements, and we're going to have to try to find
a solution that most of us can support or we're going to have to
say we can't support that requirement.

Page 33 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

So -- so let's not go that direction, please, yet because we would
need -- well, the working group is going to need months to do
this deliberation. Imagine -- we've got about a half-hour more in
this meeting. So you see why I'm doing that. But thank you,
okay?
Number 2, okay.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Hi, Chuck. It's Jordyn Buchanan with Google. So in that same
vein, I was going to approach it a slightly different way. But I do
think I was really daunted looking at the set of requirements
you've already gathered. So I think having fewer requirements
to work through might be helpful in eventually getting a result.
One way to do that might be to say you shouldn't include any
requirements where there's another alternative mechanism to
achieve the same result in a better way. So that might just be a
useful filter that you apply to cut down on the set of
requirements as opposed to adding them.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much, Jordyn. Bear with me while I just make a
brief comment on that because one of the things -- and actually
Lisa and Susan are the ones doing the heavy lifting on this right
now -- is we're taking this huge list of possible requirements that

Page 34 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

we have and we're -- to use a term by one of our working group
members, Greg Aaron, we're triaging it. We're trying to do what
you just suggested and use things like. So let's capture that as a
possible way of refining the list so it becomes more manageable.
Thank you very much, Jordyn.

JEAN-JACQUES SUBRENAT: Hello, Chuck. This is Jean-Jacques Subrenat. It's not really in
the requirement that I'm going to suggest, but I would ask you to
pay some attention to what I'm going to mention because it has
some bearing on your future requirements.
I'm referring to a plan to have a new transatlantic agreement on
data protection. And this is being negotiated right now between
the European Commission and the United States authorities.
And it is called privacy -- or Privacy Shield.
Now, I think that this public should be aware of the reasons
which accounted for the failure of safe harbor. There were
several reasons. One was a total lack of transparency. But the
second, perhaps more important reason, was that it was very
one-sided. And the agreement in principle which had been
negotiated between the U.S. government and the European
Commission many years ago was annulled, was cancelled by the
European Court of Justice a few months ago on the grounds that

Page 35 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

it was blatantly one sided to the advantage of American
businesses.
So my suggestion here, Chuck, is that without making it a
requirement in your working group, may I venture to say that it
would be a good idea if you and your team just kept track of
what is happening in these negotiations because as you know,
the E.U. and the United States of America are two of the major
actors in the world for all-over general trade but also in the area
of data protection.
So I think that one of your team or several members should keep
track of this. And I'm putting on the chat now the link to that
document. Thanks.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you very much, Jean-Jacques.
And I can assure you that we have several working group
members that are already doing that. But your point's welltaken, and we will re-emphasize it. So we've had -- in our
collection of possible inputs to our work a whole bunch of
documents related to what you're talking about have been
identified. And we'll make sure that that one is included in that.
So that was actually our first outreach that we talked about.
And so very good. Appreciated.

Page 36 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Back to 3.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Good afternoon. This is Matthew (saying name) for the record. I
would like to bring attention to a technical issue of RDS. And
this is that before this, before the traditional WHOIS system,
there wasn't a clear and useful interface to access the data for
the third-party applications, for example.
So I think it is required to define a good interface to access the
information for this new RDS system. For example, like any -many other services, we need to have a restful API to let other
applications access the information of this RDS system easily.
Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you. Very much appreciated.
Did I see 5? Okay.

RUBENS KUHL:

Rubens Kuhl, with .BR, registry stakeholder group, and GNSO
Council but not talking on behalf of any of those three
organizations.

One requirement I would like to suggest be

considered is having a fast look-up mechanism to know whether
a domain is using privacy or proxy. And by "fast," I mean

Page 37 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

realtime fast so a computer browser can know -- say, hey, I'm
looking at the domain but that domain is under privacy
protection.
That could ease up concerns about domains having its
information omitted. But some people like to know whether
that was not the case or not.
Some people suggested DNS to do that. Some people said that
RDAP could do that.

That's an implementation detail.

Requirement would be to have realtime access to the
information whether a domain is under privacy protection or
not.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you, Rubens. And as Rubens knows, and a lot of you
know, there has been a working group, privacy and proxy -- what
is it? The PPSI. I don't know if I have the acronyms right -- that
has done a lot of work. And, in fact, recommendations have
been approved by the GNSO Council and sent to the board. And
so, hopefully, the board will be considering those. And that will
probably be out for public comment from them in the near
future. And that may address some of what you're concerning.
And, again, we're going to have to coordinate with that effort as
well.

Page 38 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Do we have any more hands? I'm looking around to our number
holders? It looks like we may -- I want to really thank -- you
know, this is great participation. And not only do we appreciate
the input because we're going to go back now and we're going
to check and make sure if we haven't already included that
requirement, we're going to add it for deliberation by the
working group, okay?
And we're going to triage all these things and come up with
some manageable ways to go through this huge list of possible
requirements. And we'll deliberate on all those and try to reach
consensus on each one, pro or con or maybe some modification
of it.
Now, I want to let you know this isn't your only opportunity for
input. We only have one of these policy forums every -- once a
year. That would be really unfortunate if we had to wait until
the next policy forum or even the next ICANN meeting to do that.
But we will be reaching out. Now, typically in working groups,
for those of you that are a little bit familiar with the GNSO,
there's one initial report at the end of all the work that goes out
and asks for input. We have decided in this working group to do
it a different way. We've decided to reach out often with a
smaller request that's more realistic for the various groups to
respond to.

Page 39 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

So you're going to see lots of requests for this. Certainly we're
planning, after the first three require- -- or questions areas, the
three at the top on the screen there, or -- we may be reaching
out then.
So we're going to share with you, "Here's what the working
group's come up with. What do you think?" So watch for those
outreaches. We'll try to keep them relatively small so that
they're not a huge task, but we're going to want your feedback
throughout this working group process, which will go on for
quite a while.
Hopefully, if nothing else today, you've realized that we have
quite a huge task in front of us to reach consensus because there
are differing points of view.
So thank you very, very much for the -- for the input. You may
think of other requirements. If you can channel it through
someone that's on the working group that is in your area, do it.
If you can't, just send it to one in the leader- -- of us on the
leadership team and we will add it to our work.
Okay. Let's go forward and go to Agenda Item 4 and the -excuse me a second while I catch up with myself here.
So we have a working group meeting tomorrow. It is all morning
from 8:00 to noon. There's a break in there.

Page 40 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

[ Laughter ]

CHUCK GOMES:

And this working group meeting is open to everybody. It's a
face-to-face meeting, and so normally just working group
members can actively participate in our work, but in a face-toface meeting we'll allow anybody to participate. So this is your
opportunity.
Now, we always want input from everybody in the community.
It's just unrealistic to -- to -- if we had a group this big all the time
trying to reach consensus, it would be much harder.
But tomorrow, it is open, so if you don't have a conflict and
you'd like to see the working group in action, the meeting
tomorrow is an actual working group meeting. We're going to
try to make some progress on several areas tomorrow, okay?
So you're welcome to join us tomorrow morning if you're -- if
you're available.

Certainly all the -- all our meetings are

recorded and transcribed, and you can follow it that way as well.
So I think I've covered that slide enough.
Let's go to the next slide.
One more.

Page 41 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Okay. Here are some resources. We'll leave that up there a little
bit for you to take a look at. And we were hoping that Michele
would be able to join us at the end here, but he -- his meeting
obviously went longer than he anticipated and so I'll just cover
those areas.
Let me, right now, since we have just a few minutes and while
we're leaving that slide up there in case you want to write any of
those down or click on them, whatever, this is the first session
this working group has had like this. I really appreciate it, but I
don't know if you do or if you have any questions. We didn't
have a lot of time. Even in the past five months that we've been
operating as a working group, we've already covered quite a bit
of detail. Not as much as some of us -- some would like us to
have covered.
But does anybody have any questions, something you didn't
understand today or any comments you want to share? Let's
just take just a few minutes, and again, we have our number
carriers around the room with microphones if anybody has a
question.
Are there any questions that we might be able to clarify?
One up front here. Kavouss? She's coming with the mic.

Page 42 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

Yeah. Thank you, Chuck.
You said this is the first face-to-face meeting and it's only once a
year. What prevents you to have another face-to-face meeting,
even if maybe later the next ICANN meeting?

Is there any

difficulty to have? Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Well, Xavier is probably not in the room, but -[ Laughter ]

CHUCK GOMES:

-- but one of them might be dollars, okay? But within the GNSO,
there's an opportunity for the working group to request face-toface meetings, okay? They're challenging because people have
to pay to get to those -- right? -- but you ask a very good
question.

There's -- it is a possibility.

Obviously budget

concerns come in, the reality of people being able to attend it
and so forth. And I was a little bit wrong in what I said because
this is actually our second face-to-face meeting. We had one in
Marrakech.
[ Laughter ]

Page 43 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Okay? But not like this. It wasn't open like this and didn't have
this kind of participation because people had too many
conflicts, okay? Another question up front.

DAVID CAKE:

I'm sorry, I just wanted to briefly extend on that. We did actually
-- there is a face-to-face working group meeting sort of trial
program. We did sort of ask to be part of that. And then instead
they said, "Oh, Meeting B, we'll fold it into the new structure."
But we may well ask again and in the future they may well say,
"Oh, you guys have an extra day to do face-to-face work." We'll
see. We understand we've got a lot of work to do so we'll be
taking every opportunity of -- we can to get some more of it
done.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you.

I repeat my name, Gema Campillos from the

government of Spain. It's not really a question because I do
know the answer, but anyway, I'd like to say it aloud so that it -it can be noted.
It's about the scope of the working group. It's -- it only deals
with domain names, doesn't it?

It doesn't deal with IP

addresses. It would be fantastic if an exercise like this one can
be carried out with regards to IP addresses because the Internet

Page 44 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

doesn't end with domain names, and more and more IP
addresses are being used to identify applications for mobile
devices and so on.
There is no single set of rules for IP addresses, no consistency in
the data, no single procedures for access to those IP addresses. I
just say it aloud for anyone to take care of this. Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you. And of course I'm sure you know this. The address
registries and the ASO within ICANN deal with IP numbers. Now,
obviously IP numbers come into play with names, too.
Now, the GNSO -- and this is a GNSO PDP working group -- is
tasked with developing policy for generic top-level domain
names, okay?
So what you might want to do -- and by the way, directory
services are used by the address registries, too, as I think most of
you know. In fact, most of them, I think, are probably already
using RDAP, okay? So they're ahead of us in that regard.
So that's a good comment, too, to feed into the ASO. But thank
you for that. Appreciate that. David, go ahead.

Page 45 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

DAVID CAKE:

EN

Just a comment on our scope. In fact, I think we are -- we are a
new gTLD specifically. We're not even all domain names, right?
So because we're a GNSO project, we can't -- the ccNSO, you
know, we hope will look at our work and consider what they
might do with it and so on, but we're -- you know, our scope is
currently limited, so -- and definitely addresses are well outside
of them but we are hoping once we've done our work, who
knows, that some parts of it could be usable to some other
people, considering --

CHUCK GOMES:

Could we go to Slide 18 and then we have another question up
here and we're going to have to wrap it up here shortly.
Question up here in the second row here.

Kavouss has a

question. Go ahead, Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. You have replied already to Gema's questions but I would
add another element. The work is sufficiently complex so let us
not add another complexity to that going to the IP addresses
and so on and so forth. Very, very complex. And now coming to
the meeting and Xavier and budget, I have some difficulty to
agree with that because it's very important work, very, very
important for the future of gTLD, and I think we should make

Page 46 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

every effort to provide any possibility of any communication
face-to-face and enrich the meeting and not because of the
budget here and they say we don't have meeting. I encourage
you to proceed with that and contact and if it is a possibility, we
will raise the issue in the board/GAC meeting to have some room
for that issue. It's very important for us. Thank you.

CHUCK GOMES:

Hey, I personally appreciate what you're suggesting, so I don't
think you'll get any disagreement from here.
The key, though, is to -- when you have a face-to-face meeting,
to make sure you're at a point where you can fully capitalize on
that at a good timing, but I appreciate the support and I don't
think we'll argue with you on that.
So I want you to look at this slide. So the PDP working group is
going to consider fundamental questions and deliberate on all
these possible requirements it's been tasked with and then it's
going to have to answer this question: Is a next generation RDS
needed to support gTLD registration data and directory service
requirements?
Based on your requirements, what do you think?
And you can just mull that over a little bit. That's a -- those are -that's a key question that we're going to have to answer.

Page 47 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

Now, how many of you -- and I'm just going to do a quick poll.
Remember, we don't vote in working groups, okay? But we do
polls, if we -- if they're helpful.
How many of you already think you have an answer to that
question?
Okay. Nobody.
So probably the work we're doing will help us come to a
conclusion on that. Okay?
And should the -- how many of you think the existing WHOIS
system is adequate?
Got a couple people. Okay.
How many think it's not? Okay. All right. So -- so we've got a lot
of -- a lot of work cut out for us.
Jumping ahead, then, in the slides -- and I think we've -- did I
miss anything, team?
Okay. Well, let me -- and we didn't go -- oh, we're actually on
time for when we were supposed to end so we can let the other
cross-community session set up.
I want to thank every one of you for sitting here patiently and for
all of those who contributed, and we hope that you will continue
to provide us input as we do our work.
Page 48 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Next Generation Registration Directory Services

EN

I do ask, though, that you be patient. In a multistakeholder
bottom-up model, in issues as complex as we're dealing with,
it's going to take us some time, so bear with us. We're going to
try and keep it moving forward, but it's going to take some time
to deliberate on all these things.
Thank you very, very much and I will adjourn the meeting now
and the recording can stop.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 49 of 49

