HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 08:00 to 09:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: If staff could please let me know when we’re ready to start?
Well, good morning, everyone. Welcome to Helsinki, everybody,
and welcome virtually to Helsinki, people who are following us
remotely using the Adobe Connect. This is the start of the
EURALO General Assembly, our annual meeting that will go
through the motions of looking at our annual reports, etc., and
speaking to – we have a number of guest speakers who are
joining us today. Jean-Jacques Sahel will be joining us shortly,
the Regional Vice President of Engagement for Europe, as well as
his team. We’ll also have Michael Yakushev, who will be joining
us, who deals with the Eastern Europe part of the region. And we
will have, I think, Alan Greenberg is with us as well, the ALAC
Chair. And Rinalia Abdul Rahim, the ALAC-selected Board
member, will be speaking to us shortly.
But to start with, in order to follow the procedures, we need to
do a roll call of those people that are present, including the
people who are following us remotely. We have received a
number of proxies as well, which we have record of, and we will

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

have to list the proxies. And in fact, I think that as we go through
the roll call, if you could also mention if you are a proxy holder
for someone, then please declare it as well. Then we can tick the
list.
And have I missed anything, Wolf? Wolf Ludwig, next to me, as
you know, the previous EURALO Chair, so he has more
experience in this type of procedure than I do. So, Wolf, feel free
to jump in at any time if I’m completely going off the track. Okay,
move on. Okay.
So let’s start then with our roll call. And in fact, let’s start going
around the table first. And if people can introduce themselves,
providing the details of what At-Large Structure they are
representing. If they are not representing an At-Large Structure,
just provide your credentials. They’re not called credentials, I
guess. The organization that you’re with, or if you’re just there
just to have fun. There’s nothing wrong. We’re going to have fun
today. And maybe we’ll start from my right-hand side, so in front
of the EURALO banner. So we’ll have a little bit more time for
Sebastien, on the other side of the room, to get ready. So if we
can start over with Narine, please, we’ll start with the roll call
going around the table from you, please. So just brief, your
name, details, and the organization that you’re with.

Page 2 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

NARINE KHACHATRYAN:

EN

Good morning, everyone. I am from Armenia. I am a
representative of At-Large Structure, but here at EURALO I
participate on an individual basis. I work in the field of Internet
safety and security and education. Thank you very much.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Narine.

THOMAS MACKENZIE:

ITEMS International, in Paris, and I’m here as part of the team
that’s doing the independent review of the At-Large community.

[BASTIAN HOEFLING]:

I’m here on behalf the Dutch Internet Society chapter, of which
I’m a board member. That’s an At-Large Structure. And just to be
transparent, I work for the Amsterdam Internet Exchange.

MIRJANA TASIC:

Good morning. I am coming from Serbia. We have an association
who intend to deal with individual Internet users. The name of
the association is Plug In, and I am on behalf of that association
here.

YRJÖ LÄNSIPURO:

Page 3 of 35

ISOC Finland, and welcome to Finland once more.

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

SANDRA HOFERICHER:

EN

I am here for [inaudible] for the ALS, but also monitoring the
EuroDIG. And I am an ALAC member.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Wait, we’ve missed someone in between.

GISELLA GRUBER:

ICANN staff.

JIMMY SCHULZ:

From Germany, I represent LOAD, an ALS in Germany, and also
being an ALAC member.

ARIEL LIANG:

ICANN staff.

HEIDI ULLRICH:

ICANN staff.

SILVIA VIVANCO:

ICANN staff.

Page 4 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: EURALO Chair, but I hold a proxy also for ISOC France on behalf
of Matthieu Camus. Matthieu might be online, but he will not be
able to attend the full meeting. So if there is a vote or anything
like this, then I’ll be holding that.

WOLF LUDWIG:

EURALO Secretariat, representing Comunica-ch.

RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:

ICANN Board member selected by the At-Large.

ALAN GREENBERG:

ALAC Chair.

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: Ah, thank you, good morning. Internet Society chapter in
Wallonia, Belgium.

JEAN-JACQUES SUBRENAT: Good morning. From France, former member of the ALAC and
now the Chair of the EURALO Individual Users Association, which
was founded at the initiative of Roberto Gaetano.

MIKHAIL MEDRISH:

Page 5 of 35

Good morning, all. Russia Internet Support Foundation ALS.

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

OKSANA PRYKHODKO:

EN

Good morning. Ukraine, European Media Platform, ALS
representative.

[EUGENE PRYKHODKO]:

Good morning, also individual member from Ukraine.

ROBERTO GAETANO:

Member of the Individual Users Association.

[ERICH SCHWEIGHOFER]:

Good morning. I am a professor of [inaudible] University. I am
representing here the Wiener Zentrum fuer Rechtsinformatik.
And I’m also holding proxy for the Austrian Computing Society,
OCG. Later, [Vincent Hoss] will take over when he is finished with
his Ambassadors meeting.

SIRANUSH VARDANYAN:

Individual member in EURALO and observer from APRALO.

ANNE-MARIE JOLY:

Hello, everyone. I represent E-Seniors.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

I represent myself.

Page 6 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, everyone. Do we have anybody online that we
haven’t mentioned yet? I’m looking at the list at the moment. I
note that Matthieu Camus has joined us for the time being. I’m
not seeing anybody else. There might some people having
joined by phone? No? No one else, okay.
So, Gisella, did you manage to catch everybody’s names and
take them off the list? And how many do we have now? That’s
the computation part.

GISELLA GRUBER:

11.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Gisella. Does that include proxies that have been
held?

GISELLA GRUBER:

That was 12, because [Erich] has got the proxy for [Vincent].
Does that make – Wolf, are you in agreement?

WOLF LUDWIG:

Page 7 of 35

I am counting 14.

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yes, I am counting also 14 here on the table.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Proxies, and without other…

WOLF LUDWIG:

I calculated, sorry, already two for [Erich] because he has two,
his own and a proxy from Austrian Computing Society. Anybody
else having, besides his own vote, an additional proxy? He’s
proxy-holder for ISOC France, for Matthieu. So we have here
Anne-Marie for E-Seniors, then we have two from [Erich] makes
three. Roberto doesn’t. Then we have Oksana. Then we have
Mikhail, we have Jean-Jacques Sahel, we have Christopher
Wilkinson.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Subrenat.

WOLF LUDWIG:

Subrenat, sorry. Christopher, me, you, Jimmy, Sandra, Yrjö,
Mirjana, [Bastian], and…

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: [inaudible] online.

Page 8 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

WOLF LUDWIG:

EN

Yeah, but he’s [inaudible] in the room. According to this
calculation, 14.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: So back to Gisella. Is that correct, on record?

GISELLA GRUBER:

Correct.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: All right. Well, thank you very much. We’ve managed to count to
14 today. This is the first lesson of the day. Well done. Next year,
we’ll try and count a bit more. But that means that we are
quorate, so we can start this General Assembly and I can
welcome you all for this.
There are a few rules. I’ve noticed there are a few people new in
the room, and perhaps even online. We have taken note of the
people who are online. I don’t know if the technical things allow
us to be able to let you speak at the moment. I think we can sort
of move forward, and if you want to intervene, then please put
your hand up. So that works. The people in the room can use
their card. You just put your card up like this, and I’ll
acknowledge you. And I’ll have a list on my computer, and you
will join the queue. If I miss you for any two or three times or I

Page 9 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

don’t acknowledge you, please wave frantically at me, maybe
going like this, and I will hopefully notice you. But you also have
the ability to be in the queue by putting your hand up in the
Adobe Connect as well.
The other thing that you need to do is to mute your speakers on
your laptop. It’s okay. I know that you’re far away. That’s fine. It
will work.
But the third thing you need to do is to not do what I do, which is
to speak too quickly. We have interpretation here, and the
people in the booth behind me are obviously now sweating
away because I’m going go fast. But you need to give them a
little break sometimes as well to speak slowly. The other thing is
you need to introduce yourself every time you speak. So that’s
for the transcription, but that’s also in the interpretation
channel. Because if you don’t, then it sounds like somebody who
is completely, deeply schizophrenic is talking to themselves and
disagreeing with himself or herself. So that’s a bit of a problem.
You’re laughing, but actually it does sounds like that. I’ve
listened to some interpreted channels, and it just was very
strange.
So anyway, these are the main rules of the game. And I guess we
need to plow forward with our agenda. We were going to have
Jean-Jacques, and he’s not here yet, is he? He we were going to

Page 10 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

have Jean-Jacques Sahel to start with, but let’s start with, I
guess, with our first guest, invited guest, Rinalia Abdul Rahim,
our ALAC-selected Board member.
We are very excited to have you here, Rinalia. And, well, I’m not
quite sure. Do I need to introduce you in any further way? Or
maybe you could say a couple of words about yourself first, how
you got here and what was your interest in At-Large. And
effectively, I think I can just give the floor over to you, Rinalia.

RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:

Thank you very much, Olivier. Good morning, everyone. It’s a
pleasure to be here and in Finland. Yrjö, your sun is wreaking
havoc on my biosystems. I’m not able to sleep, and it’s affecting
my mind.
So as far as introductions go, I should say that I’m from Malaysia,
from the Asia-Pacific region. How I got into ICANN was through
the Nominating Committee. They basically asked me to apply for
a leadership position in ICANN. And I asked them, “Okay, I don’t
really know ICANN well. I have observed them from far away.”
But my focus was on ICT for Development as a field, and I wasn’t
necessarily focusing on the Internet exclusively. And the Chair of
the NomCom said that, “I think that ICANN would benefit from
you participating.” And since I didn’t know much about the
ICANN structure at the time, I asked him what part of the ICANN

Page 11 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

structure would be good for me to participate in. And he said,
“For you, based on your profile, either the ALAC or the Board.”
And he asked me to choose, and I chose the ALAC.
And the reason that I chose the ALAC was that before, in my
previous life, I had led a global multistakeholder organization,
focusing on ICT for Development. And my understanding of the
complexity of multistakeholderism tells me that you should not
come into a multistakeholder organization from the top. You
need to come in from the bottom, because you need to have a
very good understanding of the organization before you can be
in a position to make decisions on behalf of the organization
itself.
And so I spent two years as an ALAC member, and I really cherish
the experience. It really taught me a lot. I remember, as I came
into the ALAC, I didn’t speak for about three months because it
was an overwhelming environment. The issues were new to me.
I didn’t understand the context, and I needed to accelerate my
learning. And I had expected that the system in place would help
me learn. But there was no real capacity-building program at the
time. And so I decided that, okay, I’m going to take charge of my
own learning, and I pushed a lot of my own work aside and
focused, and started learning. Within six months, I was engaging
and started with, as I remember, a statement on IDN as my first
statement for the ALAC at the time. And that experience guided

Page 12 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

me, in terms of advising others that come into the system, of
how complex it is to come in and to end up being functional and
effective. It actually takes quite a bit of effort, and I understand
the difficulty, and I appreciate it very much.
Is that enough, as far as introduction, Olivier?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yes, thank you very much, Rinalia. I guess it is. I think quite a few
people here have listened. It’s nice to see how you started. Well,
I think we all started like this, and we’re a little confused at first
as to what was going on, especially with all the acronyms and
everything, and just got caught onto it. And I hope that it will
generate some vocation this year.

RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:

There is one thing I wanted to add. I’m actually moving to
Germany after this meeting, so I am going to be physically in
your region. And, yes, you’re giving me a funny look, Wolf, finally.
My husband is German, and my in-laws need a bit of care, and
that’s why we’re moving. And I would love to participate more in
your events and get to know the stakeholders better.

Page 13 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: That’s great. Thank you very much. And we will, because we do
have a full hour for this session, so if you can stay with us a little
more, then we can have questions afterwards.
But next to you is the ALAC Chair. And perhaps we can – oh,
Wolf?

WOLF LUDWIG:

A short comment to what Rinalia was saying. It’s very important,
because it reflects the experience of almost generations of
incoming ALAC members. And what Rinalia said is most basic
idea behind launching the project of the ICANN Academy at the
time, which was driven by Sandra, and which became,
meanwhile, a leadership program. But this is exactly to get the
new, incoming people appointed by the NomCom, or selected
by the communities, to bring them in touch with old hands and
to do a kind of a mentorship program with them, always at the
beginning of the annual general meeting in autumn. And I think
this will be done this year again.
Meeting A? Okay. Yeah.

HEIDI ULLRICH:

The Leadership Program – that’s the new name of it – will be
taking place at Meeting A. That’s in Copenhagen. But at Meeting

Page 14 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

C, there’s a very exciting new course being developed. And
perhaps we can talk about that a little bit later.

WOLF LUDWIG:

Okay. I think this kind of capacity-building, what Rinalia was
talking about, is still needed. It’s year-by-year a continued
necessity. But meanwhile, we have something in place for it,
what we didn’t have three, four, five years ago.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much for this, Wolf. So let’s now move to Alan
Greenberg, the ALAC Chair.
Alan, welcome to the EURALO GA.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you very much. I won’t give nearly as much history. I
could spend the next four hours or so doing that, and you might
have other things to do. I have been working with At-Large for –
it’ll be ten years by the end of this year, a significant amount of
that time on the ALAC and/or as GNSO liaison. So I’ve been a
little bit busy. And this is my second year as ALAC Chair.
A comment on a few things that are going on within ICANN right
now and within EURALO. Number one is the rewrite of the rules,
Bylaws as it were, of EURALO. We went through this exercise a

Page 15 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

number of years ago in ALAC. We had a set of rules that were sort
of – I won’t say were given to us, because I actually participated
in the creation of them a long time ago. But they clearly were no
longer satisfactory. And it was an exceedingly painful, difficult
process. We ended up approving a very large set of rules
unanimously, but it was a credit to a huge amount of people
who put a lot of effort into building it, including a number that
are sitting around this table. And it’s difficult and painful,
especially coming to compromise. But I strongly support your
doing it and hope that you’ll be successful, and soon. It’s a great
relief, after having done it, despite the difficulty and pain of the
process.
There is, associated with rewriting of your rules, is the overall
concept of, just what are ALSes and what are they supposed to
be doing? And that spans all of the five regions. There is an
activity within At-Large to a small taskforce to try to redefine
that. And I encourage any of you who care passionately about
making our overall structure work, not only within EURALO, but
across the domains, to participate in that. We always welcome
new people.
Lastly, there is a lot of other things going on outside of EURALO
that I think are important, although EURALO clearly needs to be
a well-functioning group in its own right. We’re here not to be
EURALO, just like ALAC is not here just to be ALAC, but to

Page 16 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

participate in the rest of ICANN and to help make sure that the
work that ICANN is doing, in fact, meets our needs and meets the
users’ needs of those that we’re representing. And I’m talking
about specifically things like the Accountability CCWG and Work
Stream 2, where there will be a number of topics, some of which
I know are of great interest to people. Human rights is perhaps
the one that is most often linked with EURALO, but it’s not the
only one. And I suggest again you look at those topics and, to the
extent you want to commit yourself to working hard become a
member. To the extent you just want to find out what’s going on
and maybe choose to be a member later, there’s a participant
option. But do take a look at it and become active.
And lastly, on the area of gTLDs, of which we now have –

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Alan, sorry to interrupt you here. No acronyms, please.

ALAN GREENBERG:

No acronyms. Then I have to remember what they mean.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: That’s why I’m saying, because I can’t remember.

Page 17 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

gTLD, generic top-level domain, used to be .com, .net, .org, and
one or two others. Now there is a near-infinite number of others.
And there is a process going on within the GNSO, the Generic
Name Supporting Organization, that is looking at, what do we
do next? There is a presumption in many circles that there will
be another round, or rounds, or maybe some other method of
distributing them on an ongoing basis. We are in the process of
looking at the successes and failures from the last time and
trying to see, if we do it again, how we do it again, and perhaps
why we do it again. And again, if you have an interest there, it’s
going to be a long haul, but participate.
And lastly, there’s this little thing called WHOIS. I don’t think
that’s an acronym, even though it’s all uppercase.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: It was created pre-ICANN, so it was before they started using
acronyms.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Okay. No, sir. The WHOIS we’re talking about is the concept of a
database. And I say, “concept,” because it in fact is multiple
databases of lists of who owns every gTLD – or, sorry, who is
assigned, because they’re not owned, technically, and how it’s
managed. And we all know there are privacy implications. There

Page 18 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

are all sorts of implications associated with it. And we are
looking at that, effectively from the ground up, to decide, how
should it be done in the future? Unsurprisingly, there are
multiple opinions. They are very different opinions. It’s, again,
not going to be a short or an easy process. But if you have an
interest in that area, get involved. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Alan. I think the process to replace WHOIS
is called RDS. They’ve managed to assign – is that Registration
Directory Services? I [crosstalk] RDS all the time. I don’t even –

ARIEL LIANG:

Registration Directory Services. Every time it’s mentioned in a
meeting I’ve been in, the person who is speaking could not
remember what the initials stood for. But that is, indeed, I think
what it stands for. And if not, we can change it. There’s no
reason we can’t use same acronym three or four different ways.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Okay, we’ll keep that in mind. Thanks very much, Alan, for this.
And, yes, that has huge privacy issues. And as we know, we’re
pretty strong in Europe about these issues of privacy. And
certainly, one of the things that has come up in the policy space

Page 19 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

a number of times was to do with having this proxy registration
details being sent over to ICANN.

ALAN GREENBERG:

The waiver, in fact, is a requirement that registrars keep
information for a certain amount of time past the end of
registration, and that length of time is illegal in some countries.
But of course, in the US we have no privacy rules. We do have
privacy rules. Sorry.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: No comment.

ALAN GREENBERG:

But it’s not only privacy. It’s issues of law enforcement. It’s
issues of consumer protection. Consumers have a lot of aspects
to their lives. They don’t want their personal information
revealed. On the other hand, they don’t want to be scammed. So
it’s a complex world we’re living in.
I will have to be leaving to go to the RDS session shortly after
this, but I thank you for the opportunity to talk.

Page 20 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Alan. And if you are interested in any of these topics,
please let ICANN staff know, At-Large staff know, and then we
can put you onto these mailing list.
Wolf Ludwig?

WOLF LUDWIG:

Just one short addition to what Alan said, and linking up ALAC
and EURALO. I think we all realized this pleasure, that after the
GAC liaison was formally installed between the GAC and the
ALAC – Government Advisory Committee – was, in my opinion, a
historical moment, to have this formal relationship installed.
And we could note with pleasure that for this meeting there was
already preliminary liaison selected. And this is Yrjö Länsipuro,
one of our old hands and highly appreciated members. And I just
would like to add my congrats again, for the record, to Yrjö.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you for this, Wolf. So are there any questions to any of our
guests at the table? And noticing that Alan is about to run off, do
you have anything to ask him before he quickly runs out?
Alan Greenberg?

Page 21 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

I’m not sure what I’ll be able to list as my accomplishments
when I step down as Chair, but I know one of them. And the one
that I will certainly put very near the top of the list is establishing
a GAC liaison, a Governmental Advisory Committee liaison, with
the ALAC, the At-Large Advisory Committee. It’s something we’ve
been talking about as long as I’ve been around. And I am
delighted that we have actually done it. And I’m delighted that
Yrjö is filling the position at the moment.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Alan. All right. We have a question. Please introduce
yourself.

[SONITIPU]:

I am from Nigeria. My question is to Alan. I have a little difficulty
in understanding what privacy is and consumer protection,
because if we discussion of privacy rules or laws, how do they
define that? Because we give out information, and this
information is delivered that way. And there is no possibility of
having it as a private. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

In this room, I would not pretend to be the expert on privacy. But
the short answer is that, yes, you must give information to a
registrar to register a domain name. The question is, who else do

Page 22 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

they show that to, and why? Do they show it just to the registry?
Maybe not to the registry at all. Do they show it to ICANN? Do
they show it to everyone else in this room who might ask? And
those are the questions that we’re addressing.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yeah, thank you. And we do have working groups that work with
this. So, [Sonitipu], I know you’re involved with At-Large. You’re
very welcome to take part in some of the working groups. We’ll
work it out after this – I was going to say call – this meeting.
Christopher Wilkinson?

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: Thank you. Partly to complement what Alan has just said and to
make one or two additional points of the underlying principle of
European privacy law is that data that is collected from the
public should be used only for the purposes for which it has
been supplied. And the ICANN system, in effect, confronts this
principle because the ICANN rules oblige the registrars, notably,
and the registries, to make WHOIS openly available. WHOIS
contains the registration data not of the gTLD itself, but of all the
registrants in each registry.
We’ve had quite a lot of problems with this over the years. And
most recently, as has already been mentioned, we have the

Page 23 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

study group working on the arrangement whereby registrars can
apply for a waiver if they find that the WHOIS rules in ICANN are
contrary to their privacy laws in their jurisdiction. This, however,
creates almost bureaucratic problems of enormous size,
because the ICANN principle has been that each individual
registrar should make a separate application for such a waiver.
And occasionally in the ICANN mailing lists, you see the report of
an individual registrar having applied or having been granted
such a waiver.
Working in this committee, together with other civil society
participants, I have tried to argue that, at least in the European
context, all registrars are subject to European privacy law,
should benefit from what in Brussels we will have called it a
block exemption. There should be one decision by ICANN to
create the waiver for all registries and registrars under the
European privacy law jurisdiction, which have naturally been
extended to all the member states through EU legal
mechanisms.
That, to date, has been rejected. It’s been rejected specifically by
the ICANN staff. And I’ve had some difficulty in recognizing the
neutrality and goodwill of some of the ICANN staff in this field. I
understand them insofar as the major lobby that is attacking
European privacy law in this particular segment is the trademark
lobby, because it’s not law enforcement. Law enforcement has

Page 24 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

access through their own rules and procedures in nearly all
national jurisdictions. The issue is that the companies that
provide service to the trademark owners wish to have online
access to the WHOIS information worldwide, without restriction.
And that is still a serious problem under European privacy law.
Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Okay, thank you very much, Christopher. Could you turn your
mic off, please? Thanks. Alan had to go, but he has advised me
that, with the help of Roberto Gaetano, the ALAC is going to
address this question. And I think that you must have just
volunteered to be one of the penholders for that statement.
You’ve been drafted in. And you’ve written a lot about it in the
working group, yes. So it’s certainly something which I’ve seen
being felt in other regions as well, but in Europe in particular this
is a big issue, indeed. So a statement is actually likely to come
from the ALAC about this.
Okay, we’ve suddenly moved straight into policy and into the
WHOIS issue. So we’re going to have to go to… Sorry. Oh,
Yakushev is behind. Okay, yeah, he is joining us at the next
session.
So any questions for Rinalia?

Page 25 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

This is a very silent group of people. Jean-Jacques Subrenat?

JEAN-JACQUES SUBRENAT: At this stage, I haven’t had my first coffee, so it won’t be a
question. It’s just a blurting out a statement of admiration for
what Rinalia has done. I think that the ALAC, the At-Large
community, made a terrific choice. I feel this of importance,
because I was one of the members of the Board on the ALAC
review, which proposed two seats to be selected by the At-Large
community and one seat was provided. And that one was very
well filled. Thank you, Rinalia.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Rinalia?

RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:

Thank you, Jean-Jacques. That’s very kind. Before you let me go,
I have one thing to say. And one of the questions that Olivier
posed to me, and I thought the first one was a bit of a trick
question, it was, “How important are ALSes to ICANN?” I think
you know the answer to that. You don’t need to hear it from me.
The second question was, “How does ICANN or the Board bring
input from ALSes closer to decision-making?” And I wanted to
cite an example that is actually happening in the At-Large

Page 26 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

community. It’s what AFRALO has done in the IANA stewardship
transition process. What they’ve done is they’ve come up with
AFRALO statements consistently. And there was one point last
year, in June, where that statement actually made a difference
in Board deliberation. And it’s not a formal thing. It was just that
I was aware of what was happening in the AFRALO drafting or
discussion, and it just so happened that the Board was
discussing it at that time. And I was able to raise the AFRALO
input, and that really helped the discussion.
And what I’m alluding to is that if you have certain issues that
you care passionately about, that’s critical to something that
ICANN is working on, if EURALO wants to put forward a
statement on that, that could potentially be important to at
least the Board decision-making process. And if I’m aware about
it, then I can certainly channel it appropriately, in a timely
manner. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Rinalia. And for anybody who is interested
in seeing how AFRALO and AfrICANN, they have this joint
meeting, AFRALO-AfrICANN meeting. There’s one in this very
room tomorrow at 1:30 PM. So if you’re interested, it’s always a
good thing.
Christopher Wilkinson?

Page 27 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: Yes, at the risk of taking the floor again, Rinalia, just one quick
question. On Sunday, in the CCWG, the Cross-Community
Working Group, on the transition and the accountability of
ICANN, we had a rather lively discussion about diversity. I will
spare you the details. You can guess most of them. My question
to Rinalia is, structurally, in the Board and in the Supporting
Organizations, how would you advise us to move forward in
improving – quickly, if possible – the overall diversity of the
leadership in ICANN at all levels?

RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:

Christopher, it’s not an easy answer. Part of it is already
embedded in the way we do things. There’s the geographic
requirement. There is the encouragement for gender balance.
And there is the consistent reminder that we need to make sure
that we have the diversity of skills and knowledge and expertise
that’s required for whatever it is that we are addressing. I don’t
have a quick fix, but I would like to benefit from the discussion
that comes up. And I’m really glad that Work Stream 2 actually
has a party that’s going to address it. And I’m going to pay
special attention to it, even though other Board members are
taking the lead. But that’s actually one of those things that I

Page 28 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

have subscribed to as a participant in the group. So I will be with
you in that. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Rinalia. Any other questions? We still have time for
one last question, so. Well, looks like there are no questions
around the table. And I’m looking online. There are none either.
Wolf?

WOLF LUDWIG:

I’m just asking myself if we should formally adopt the agenda
before we go to the break.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: That’s definitely what we do next. But first I’d like to thank
Rinalia for joining us for this.

RINALIA ABDUL RAHIM:

Thank you, everyone. It’s been a pleasure.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: And I was going to add one more thing though, and then Heidi
will add something, because she’s speaking into my ear while
I’m talking. It’s difficult for me to do the two at the same time,

Page 29 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

especially if it’s something completely different to what’s going
on, on the table.
But there was an allusion also to the public interest. Our
colleagues here spoke about this. And as you know, Wolf Ludwig
has launched an At-Large-wide working group on the public
interest. There is also a big discussion going on in ICANN about
the public interest. In fact, yesterday the topic came up, and it
comes up in quite a few sessions. And so if you are not yet
involved in this topic, and it’s something that’s very dear to
many of our hearts, since the At-Large community is acting in
the public interest, then please step forward. And again, you can
come during the break and talk to us and put your name down
on the list.
We have one more thing to do before we have a quick break. And
that’s the adoption of the agenda itself. We had moved things
around a little bit. And so the – where am I now? There we go. So
the proposed agenda is on the website, and it’s also in the folder
that you have been provided. We also have it online, for those
people that are joining us remotely. I think there is a link in the
chat to go over to today’s thing.
So just quickly going through, we’re going to close this session
immediately after we’ve adopted the meeting minutes from our
last meeting. And then we will have the next part will be a

Page 30 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

briefing about the EURALO Bylaws Taskforce. We’ll have a
discussion, I think, during that time on a specific point. We’ll
have to keep it short as well, but a specific point about quorum.
And then we’ll have the launch of the EURALO At-Large Structure
Engagement Taskforce.
After that, outline of the EURALO CROPP – yes, another acronym,
Community Regional Outreach Pilot Program – concept for 2016
and ’17. And then we’ll have the EURALO Outreach Strategy, with
Jean-Jacques Sahel and with Michael Yakushev. I understand
that Michael has joined us in the room. Welcome, Michael. If you
wish, you can join us at the table. There’s still some spare seats,
so you’re very welcome to join us here. In fact, you’re
encouraged to do so. And, yeah, so that’s the agenda for today.
We’ll have miscellaneous, if there are any additional orders of
business to be added. And then we’ll close the General Assembly
and be able to go for a break.
Jean-Jacques Subrenat?

JEAN-JACQUES SUBRENAT: Thank you. I’d just like, under miscellaneous, to be able to say
one sentence about the meeting following yours, about the
EURALO Individuals Association, which is held in another hall,
but just after the EURALO meeting. Thanks.

Page 31 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Jean-Jacques. Heidi Ullrich?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Thank you, Olivier. I just wanted to make two points. One is that,
was that an action item to include Rinalia in EURALO calls more
regularly? To invite her?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Wolf Ludwig says, “Let’s try.” Olivier Crepin-Leblond says yes,
please. Heidi suggested it. Yes, that’s excellent. And so we’re all
nodding. I think there is an overall – any objections to having
Rinalia join our calls? I note that the previous ALAC-selected
Board member, who is sitting at the table, was joining all of our
calls. But then, he was from EURALO at the end of the day as
well.
So Heidi?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Thank you. The second point is that in your blue folders that you
all should have, there is one copy of the new EURALO brochure.
And we have extra copies here. We have quite a few extra copies
here. This is just one pile. But I know that there are a lot of
outreach events coming up through the summer. So if you

Page 32 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

would like to take some of these for your outreach activities or
for those sessions that you’re going to go to, please do take
these along. Thank you.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Heidi. You’re not going to be able to bribe
anyone with brochures. Do they give you anything special?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

We have 1,500 of these.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: We have 1,500 of these, 1,500 of these. Take more than one,
please, and distribute them back home. But we also have some
of these wonderful EURALO pins, which nobody was aware of.
But we had these made a while ago, and I’ve kept those in my
closet for a number of years. They’re vintage now. They are the
original EURALO pins from – what was it, 2000 and something? I
think it was after the 1900s, wasn’t it? Yeah. They are not that
old, but they are collectibles. And you can probably trade them
on eBay for a lot more than a EURALO brochure.

WOLF LUDWIG:

Olivier? Keep them for another century, and they will become
even much more valuable. Just before we go to the break, I have

Page 33 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

an addition to make. I just realized, on my mails, that I got a
proxy vote and [inaudible] from Carolin Silbernagl, from dotHIV.
So we have one more. And we have 15 now.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you, Wolf. And one more item on the agenda was the
approval of the minutes from our last meeting. Do we have
these? They’re on the screen at the moment. No, they’re not. Are
they?
You need to click on them. The link is in the chat, and you will
see them. They are not printed. We are in Finland. We’re trying to
save trees. It goes in line with having a recyclable room card. At
least in my hotel, it’s recyclable. So if you do end up in rain, you
come back, your room card does not work. It’s unfortunate.
So staff is scrolling through it at such a rate that I don’t expect
anyone to be able to read. Thank you for being ready. Very, very
good. 21st of October, 2015, was our last General Assembly, in
Dublin. And between two pubs, we managed to conduct a
EURALO meeting. It was a morning meeting with a big headache.
Okay. No, it was afternoon. Okay.
I do want to remind staff that they are standing between
everyone here and a coffee. No pressure. Okay, so the whole
meeting is transcribed, so we have a full transcript of the

Page 34 of 35

HELSINKI – At-Large EURALO General Assembly (Part 1)

EN

meeting, starting with someone very well known, the “unknown
speaker.” But beyond that, after that, it was Wolf Ludwig. That’s
why you need to say your name before you speak. Otherwise,
you end up as “unknown speaker,” or, “male voice,” or, “female
voice.”
And it says, “Welcome back to the second part of our General
Assembly.” Of course, there was a first part of the General
Assembly. Anyway, so that’s the transcript. So there were
transcripts and recordings. Does anybody object to the
transcripts and recordings?
I guess that’s the only thing I can ask. Okay, seeing everyone
eager – they can smell the coffee already in the room – I think we
have to take a break. I think we’ve done pretty well for this first
part of the General Assembly, so thank you very much. We’re
breaking off for 15 minutes – 15, not 50 – 15 minutes. And we’ll
start at 9:15 with the next part of our agenda. Thank you.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 35 of 35

