ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO-IGO INGO Access to Curative Rights Mechanisms Policy Development
Process WG
Tuesday, 28 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at

The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Petter Rindforth: I'd like - good idea that we'll start with (Greg) welcome and roundup
presentation. So having said that welcome to the IGO NGO Access to the
Rights Protection Mechanism Working Group. I'm Petter Rindforth, co-chair
with Phil Corwin representing IPC and next?
Man:

Since we're going around the room (unintelligible).

Bruce Tonkin:

Bruce Tonkin observing from the board.

(Garrick Campbell):
Mary Wong:

(Garrick Campbell). I am from Jamaica.

Mary Wong, ICANN staff.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 2

Marika Konings:

Marika Konings, ICANN staff.

Mason Cole:

Mason Cole with Donuts.

David Satola:

David Satola, The World Bank.

(Jonathan Batero):

(Jonathan Batero) from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and

Development.
(Ty Grain):

(Ty Grain), WIPO.

Brian Beckham:

Brian Beckham also World Intellectual Property Organization.

Kathy Kleinman: Kathy Kleinman. Non-Commercial.
Petter Rindforth: there are three of you sitting around as well we have three spaces here so
you're welcome. And also (Mike) just state your name and position and
interest. Thanks.
(William Shepard):

(William Shepard) just joined from the seats in the back.

Farzaneh Badii:

I'm Farzaneh Badii, NCUC member.

(Ben Franco):

And (Ben Franco), NPOC.

(Gongish):

(Gongish). I am a member of the NCUC from the Center for Communication
Governance.

Nigel Hickson:

Nigel Hickson, ICANN staff.

(Dalov Chang):

(Dalov Chang), ICANN staff.

Petter Rindforth: Okay then welcome everybody. Are you connected?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 3

Man:

I was just entering the chat room.

Petter Rindforth: Yes, okay. Yes.
Woman:

(Unintelligible).

Petter Rindforth: Mary?
Mary Wong:

Thank you. Hello everybody. This is Mary from staff again. I just want to
acknowledge that we also have remote participants including several
members of this working group. And for the benefit of those on the low
participation it would be helpful if you're on the phone bridge to also be on the
Adobe Connect if you wish to speak because if you're only in Adobe Connect
you will not be able to be heard. So if you are on the phone bridge please get
into Adobe Connect if you can. And if you wish to speak please wave your
hand and we will alert the chairs or if you wish you could also type your
question and comments into Adobe Connect for us to read out. Thank you.

Petter Rindforth: Thanks. And I see George Kirikos is one of the members that's on the Adobe
Connect so welcome.
Man:

I'm (unintelligible).

Petter Rindforth: Okay I'll start. Well on the agenda really part of a brief update on the Working
Group and the issue around the topic. And I can just start in saying that we –
this Working group was actually - we had our first meeting in August 11,
2014. But the topic as such is definitely not new. It has been discussed
previously during the years. And there are - there is one report from 2007 for
ICANN issues report on dispute handling for idea names and abbreviations.
And I was glad that (Malcolm) is here because WIPO has been active during
the years facing the need for separate dispute resolution policy. And as you
note the full name of working group is leading also with IGOs and INGOs. But

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 4

it's a rather early stage. We made the initial conclusion that INGOs actually
could handle and have handled in efficient way the current dispute dissolution
policies. So we decided to put that parked on the side so to speak and
proceed with handing the IDO topics. And we discussed initially the possibility
to not creating – well I would say there are three possible solutions for this if
there is a necessity to do anything at all could be just the clarification on the
IDOs protection and using the policies they have today or to amend the
UDRP and the URS or to create new separate dispute resolution policy to
cover these topics.
And although we have not made any 100% final conclusions but on a very
early stage we come to the conclusion it's not the best way to make
amendments to the current UDRP procedure. And as you know there is also
another working group now dealing with the review all the rights protection
mechanisms and all gTLDs. And they will deal with the UDRP on a phase two
starting in February 2018.
So that gives us two possible solution set as we said before. We reached out
to Professor (Swaine) to get expert opinions. And that was either to make
some clarifications or recommendations when it comes to IGOs that they
could actually use the present dispute resolution policies or to create
something that well similar to the UDRP but the second phase maybe
another neutral panelist, three-member panelist or so will deal with a second
phase of dispute policy. Yes please?
Philip Corwin:

I just want to jump in here. I'm Philip Corwin. I'm the co-chair of this Working
Group and I'm a member of the Business Constituency in the Commercial
Stakeholder Group and one of their – one of the BCs to GNSO councilors.
I just want to add some further background to what Petter had said and I'll put
this in a more of a context. Then we get into discussing the final memo
received from Professor Swain at George Washington University in
Washington DC. The – this working group is one piece of a broader attention

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 5

being given by the ICANN organization to concerns of IGOs and backed up
by – backed up in those concerns by the Governmental Advisory Committee
regarding protections for names and acronyms of international
intergovernmental organizations. So I just to help put this in context the – yes,
the GAC advice on IGO acronyms was for second-level protection.
That is level protection not at the registry level but at the registrant domain
level in the form of a permanent fit those notifications to both the potential
registrant of a matching domain and the relevant IGO. This would be pretty
much similar to what goes on now in new TLDs at the trademark
clearinghouse, allow the IGO a timely opportunity to effectively prevent
potential misuse and infusion, allow for a final and binding determination by
an independent third party to resolve any disagreements in the IGO and a
registrant which relates most directly to this working group be it no cost or of
a nominal cost only to the IGO.
I will state on that one that this working group after the GAC adopted that
position there communicated I believe at the Buenos Aries meeting last year
we sent the letter to the GAC asking if they had any subsidy mechanism in
mind because this working group has no authority to commit ICANN funds to
subsidize dispute resolution actions brought by IGOs and also what they
consider to be a nominal costs and whether they consider the current cost of
bringing a UDRP or URS to be nominal.
And frankly we got back an answer which was not entirely clear complete. So
we still don't quite know the answer to that question. And in terms of the - let
me just make sure I'm - the PDP recommendations of the GNSO Working
Group that wrapped up in November 2013 was that at the second level there
should be a 90 days trademark clearinghouse claims notice for acronyms of
IGOs that were on the GAC list as of March 2013. And they issued a report to
on the other issues.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 6

Now what's pending is and what the board has done is a temporary matter.
So I want to make sure that we just have a small piece of this total picture.
The board adopted a second level reservation of IGO acronyms on the March
2013 GAC list that was done by the board. And the board also so as far as
permanent protections the board provided none for acronyms but provided
top and second level reservation only for the names of IGOs, the full names
that were on the GAC list.
And that's - I'm not sure if that's been completed because there was a letter
sent that just came to our attention last week on 17th of June to the chairman
of the GAC, Thomas Schneider from Akram Atallah, Head of the Global
Domains Division say that in order to implement these permanent protections
the GDD would require additional information.
And what they required was the full name of each IGO in up to two languages
to be chosen by the IGO. So that's kind of where things stand and I'm – I
hope that somewhat clarifies the distinction between some of the broader
issues that have been articulated by IGOs and the GAC is back them up. And
the narrower issuer, narrower issues that we were looking at in this working
group which is basically two questions. One does an IGO have standing to
bring an action in an existing curatives rights processes, the UDRP and the
URS.
And our - while we haven't come to permanent conclusions and
recommendations we've pretty much reached the conclusion that IGOs would
have standing either through trademarking their names or acronyms or by
asserting the protections available to them under Article 6 tier of the Paris
prevention which provides protections and national trademark law through a
notification to WIPO.
And the issue that's held up and basically put this group on hold for a year is
whether or not using those existing curative rights processes which permit an
appeal from a decision to accord a mutual jurisdiction would violate any

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 7

sovereign immunity rights of IGO. And not being international law experts we
had no idea what the sovereign immunity rights of IGOs were.
And it took some considerable amount of time to both one, secure some very
modest funding from ICANN to hire a legal expert and two to locate a legal
expert who was willing to undertake the task for the amount of funding
available and had the requisite expertise. And that has led to the final memo
received from Professor Edward Swain of George Washington University Law
School about two weeks ago.
And Mary I looked in the schedule session information that links to the Adobe
chat room there is not a link to the Swain memo. I don't know if in the chat
room staff can provide a link to that link for individuals. I haven't seen it yet
and I would like to obtain a copy and review it. So I just wanted to add that to
put everything in context.
So where we are now is we've received the Swain memo which is 32 pages
in length. So this is the answer to the four questions posed by the working
group are rather complex. And the answers are not black and white as in
many things in the law the answers are it depends. It depends on the specific
disputes and it depends frankly different courts and different national
jurisdictions handle sovereign immunity issues in different ways. So there's
no standard answer that covers every potential nation in the world.
So I'll stop there and hand things back to Petter to lead us to the next stage
of this discussion. Thank you.
Petter Rindforth: Thanks. Just a quick question. When we talk about the history and this topic
that leads us to this place Brian do you want to say something?
Brian Beckham:

I'm sorry could you repeat that?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 8

Petter Rindforth: Well when we're talking about the history and the topic that leads us to this
working group before we went into the expert do you have any initial
comments?
Brian Beckham:

Yes thanks Petter. This is Brian Beckham for the record. I apologize, I was
just reading that chat transcript. But I think in the simplest terms the question
of the need for a curative rights protection mechanism for IGOS arises from
two aspects in particular of the UDRP, the Uniform Domain Name Dispute
Resolution Policy. And those are that the complaining party have trademark
or service mark rights that they can evoke to bring a UDRP claim. And then if
a UDRP claim is successful if there's an abusive registration found by an
external panelist then under the UDRP there's the possibility - and I'm using
air quotes -- of an appeal to a court of what's called mutual jurisdiction.
So this is a jurisdiction that the registrant has signed up to when he registered
the domain name and the complainant has agreed to in submitting a claim
under the UDRP. So that requires submission to a court in some jurisdiction
around the world where either the registrar or the registrant is located. And
because of complex questions about privileges and immunities for
intergovernmental organizations that was seen as problematic for IGOs to
submit to court jurisdiction which would waive those privileges and
immunities.
And I – so I just want to highlight one thing. I've just looked at the revised
draft of the Swain report. And I think two things that are stated very clearly in
the outset might be helpful for the work of this group going forward. The first
is there's a statement on the top of the second page which says IGO
possessing rights in a name under the Paris convention. And I know there's
been a lot of discussion in this working group about what's the scope and
nature of rights under the Paris convention. But I think as a starting point or
an assumption the professor has squared that off and stated quite clearly that
IGOs would have rights under the Paris convention sufficient for a curative
rights protection mechanism like the UDRP.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 9

And secondly on the bottom of Page 3 it says IGOs might also volunteer a
non-judicial substitute such as arbitration. And that's in lieu of the submission
to a court jurisdiction.
Philip Corwin:

Yes I would just (unintelligible). I think the first one you cited kind of backs up
what I said a moment ago which is that in regard to the standing our
preliminary conclusion not yet final is that an IGO which has either
trademarked its name or acronym or has a – has not trademarked but has
asserted rights under the Paris convention would have standing. So the
existing procedures would work.
The remaining question is does it offend the scope of sovereign immunity in
the rare instance where an IGO would bring a UDRP or a URS win and the
registrant would then say I don't agree with the result and I'm going to an
available court of mutual jurisdiction for a so-called "appeal" which is a de
novo action.

Man:

Yes thanks Phil and thanks for that explanation of the jurisdiction issue. It
occurs to me like I guess there's two quite separate cases there. There's the
case where the NGO actually has a domain name and someone is raising a
complaint given that they had their own trademark presumably. And that
would be challenging the NGO's right to have that name and hence, you
know, having that name canceled. That's one scenario. It may not be a
scenario that's thought about.
The scenario I think you're typically talking about is the scenario where
there's a registrant of a domain name and the NGO wants to undertake a
dispute mechanism to overturn that domain name and then there's a court as
a fallback. But it occurs to me that if that second case goes to court
essentially the registrar and registrant that are subject to the jurisdiction of the
court because it's an action against them. It's not an action against the NGO.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 10

In other words if the NGO has the name and so the question is, you know,
the courts giving in order for that name to be removed from that registrant or
not. It's not actually giving any direction to the NGO. So I just think it's
probably worth understanding those two cases.
Brian Beckham:

Maybe I can certainly clarify. This is Brian again. So what would happen is if
a registrant had registered a name that was found to be abusive of an IGO's
rights and the registrant felt that that wasn't supported by law in some
jurisdictions they would actually go to a court. So they would actually be
bringing the IGO into court if you will to have a declaratory action in their
favor that they weren't infringing. So it wouldn't – so in other words it's not the
registrar or the registrant that's being brought into court but they're bringing –
they would be bringing the successful UDRP complainant into court.

Man:

Yes but understanding that the action, the actual action of either registering
or canceling the domain name that's what would be the subject of the court
finding surely. So it's a direction to the registrar most likely to say either
cancel this name or keep this name.

Brian Beckham:

Right.

Petter Rindforth: All right I had a possibility to read the expert report (unintelligible) any specific
comments on his conclusions there?
Philip Corwin:

Let me jump in here and, you know, we don't have a very structured agenda
for this meeting other than since we just received the Swain memo very
shortly prior to leaving home to travel to this meeting. But, you know, Brian
focused on two key things. Let me get to another one that's refers to
something I brought up a few minutes ago. And that begins at let's see yes,
at the bottom of Page 8 in the Swain memo. Yes Mary?

Mary Wong:

Apologies, so just a note that George Kirikos had raised his hand so he
wishes to speak.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 11

Philip Corwin:

Okay I'll step back and let George speak and then I'll get back to what I was
saying. Go ahead George.

George Kirikos:

Hi George Kirikos for the transcript. Generally - oh, I can hear myself. There's
an echo on this (unintelligible).

Petter Rindforth: We can hear you.
George Kirikos:

I can hear myself twice (unintelligible). Anyhow (unintelligible) memo and he
made most of the cases (unintelligible) on the earlier draft. Over on Page 9
which was a comment I had previously regarding Page 8 he seems to have
missed that point which was the part about the scenario whether it isolates
the question of whether an IGO has legitimate expectation that would it be
entitled to immunity as the UDRP. He missed a point that I made in the earlier
draft that that scenario doesn't actually isolate the question because there's a
asymmetry whether an IGO is defending an action or whether it's bringing an
action in court. And so he kind of missed the mark on that point.
But in general I agree with the report in that from a legal point of view I
believe the status quo has supported that nothing requires us to change the
UDRP. If we imagine a thought experiment of the UDRP not existing at all an
IGO would necessarily have to waive immunity in order to bring an action
against a registrant for a domain name in court. And that was backed up by
the State Department's memo which the author of this report referenced in
the footnotes and in the document itself. So that's my comments for now.
Thank you.

Petter Rindforth: Yes, thanks. (Bruce) I saw you added some comments in the chat room. If it's
more or less what you said before? Oh yes. Okay thanks.
Philip Corwin:

Okay. Why don't we just speak a second then we can get into those slides
you have on immunity. But what I wanted to just briefly refer to here is that at

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 12

the bottom of Page 8 of the memo -- and again apologies for those of you
who haven't yet seen the memo but we'll – it is available now in final form -he starts I said the core questions of whether an IGO is "entitled to immunity."
And then he goes on at the top of Page 9 and this illustrates the lack of black
and white answers to the questions we've answered. And it says, "As
explained the answer depends. IGOs generally enjoy immunity under
international law but different jurisdictions apply the law differently." That is to
say that -- I'm speaking for myself here not quoting -- that a court in one
nation might say that an IGO has broader or narrower scope of immunity than
a court of another nation.
And then he goes on to say but different jurisdictions apply the law differently.
And even within the same jurisdiction different IGOs may be treated
differently. And then he goes on in the full memo to document that that is
indeed the situation in the United States where different courts of appeal
have comment the issue differently. And the Supreme Court has never
resolved the differences between them.
And then says Part B of the memo introduces the complication of any such
immunity may be waived every – even nations can waive sovereign immunity
if they wish to -- that's my comment there, not his language -- through the
mutual jurisdiction prevision. So I'll stop there quoting but just kind of the
things we've been struggling with in this working group on one hand but for
the UDRP and the URS IGOs would have no recourse in regard to a domain
name that they've viewed as infringing other than to bring a judicial action in
some national court. And it will be up to them whether they wish to waive their
immunity if they thought they were entitled immunity to get that relief.
So the UDRP and the URS provide a much less expensive faster and nonjudicial alternative to bringing that court action. But they are bound by the
rules of the UDRP and URS to if they win the registrant has the option. That
may be exercised in only rare cases because it's kind of a slam-dunk case.
It's likely that a registrant would spend the time and money for the appeal if it

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 13

looks like a losing argument but still that does exist. And so it's whether by
essentially waive it - being compelled to waive their unity to bring UDRP
they've – we've offended their immunity in some way.
And then the other thing we've been struggling with is that if this was simply a
situation between ICANN and an IGO it be very simple to solve. It could be
solved in the same way that the professor discusses the IGOs solve this
issue all over the world in commercial contracts which rather than if there are
disputes say it's generally a clause that says rather than going to court we'll
go to a non-judicial arbitration form and agree to a binding decision there.
But we do have in this case a third-party the domain registrant who when
they register they agree to be bound by the UDRP and now in a new TLD by
the URS as well. But in their involuntary accession to that possibility of
bringing brought into the dispute resolution policies they were told that they
had a right to go to court if they were unhappy with the result. So that's kind
of this four corners of the dilemma we've been struggling with.
And now if you had anything to say Petter why don't you go ahead and Mary
has some slides on the immunity question that she's going to display for us
after that.
Petter Rindforth: Thanks. Just was a comment. When we're talking about both the US and the
UDRP and there are some interesting differences between these two dispute
resolution policies especially when it comes to the topic we are discussing.
Within the URS I mean there are three steps. It's still in the process and it's
still panelist that decides on the topic as compared to the UDRP. And I would
just throw out the question both to Brian if you have any initial reply to that but
also to others here in the room if you see the same need to change or add
when it comes to the URS compared to the UDRP in this aspect?
Brian Beckham:

Thanks Petter. To be perfectly honest I don't think it's a topic that's really
received much attention. I do know that in several times over the years in

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 14

GAC advice there's been a request for a more rapid resolution mechanisms
so something to address similar to the abuse point of contact in the ICANN
registry agreement where there's eminent risk of harm for an infringing
registration could be addressed in a rapid time frame along the lines of 24 to
48 hours. So I think that maybe have – maybe has overtaken discussion on
whether the same modifications to the URS would be desirable.
Petter Rindforth: I'm sorry I'm not suggesting that the same modifications would be decided
before the UDRP because I say I think we're still on the same line that we
should try to not change the UDRP at least not just for this specific topic. I
mean we're as I said initially there is another working group that sometime in
the future we'll also look at the UDRP and see if there is any changes that are
needed. But in – still we need – we talk about this aspect what I meat was is
if it's enough - if the URS is enough as it is today is although after the three
steps of panelists you can still take the case to a court I presume that then we
will still have the same formulation as with the UDRP. But I understand that
when it comes to the UDRP it's just one step and then there's the position
that maybe they can see or the case was - maybe take it to the second step
to the court directly.
Brian Beckham:

All right so we have the slides now. Let me - why don't we go – yes? Sir, go
ahead sir. State your name please.

David Satola:

Thank you, David Satola from the World Bank. I propose a last question in
exchange I agree with Phil's conceptual – contextualization of the discussion
we're having today. I would also add that when the IGOs were first confronted
with the issue of the new gTLD registrations what we asked for were
preventative rights. And in the absence of those rights being granted it was
suggested that existing curative rights would be sufficient and applicable. And
I think that the discussion that we're having now including the analysis in
Professor Swain's memo results from that sequence of events.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 15

So I think the question I think that you asked Petter was did the IGOs ask for
this? No, we asked for preventative rights. And we're still – that discussion is
still ongoing in other contexts as Phil has rightly said. So, you know, the
question of how to address curative rights is an interesting one. And it's one
that we're interested in pursuing if our original requests for preventative
treatment as some other international organizations have received is not
granted. Thank you.
Petter Rindforth: Thanks.
Brian Beckham:

Thank you David. And again I – at the beginning of this discussion I tried to
lay out that this is – there's more to this IGO issue than this working group is
looking at it. And I did discuss what the board has done and what the board is
still continuing and those talks between the board and the GAC and the small
IGO group and going on for a very long time without a final conclusion and,
you know, I don't know if they'll finish first or this working group will finish first
but we're going to move forward with all deliberate speed.
And I want to say now I'm – I don't – (unintelligible) to apologize but just
explain that the reason that this session may seem a bit disorganized is that
the final Swain memo was received so close to this meeting that there was
simply no opportunity for the Working Group to go through the final memo
and identify the key conclusions and maybe the key disagreements that we
had with it prior to getting there to Helsinki. But we will be doing that and then
moving on toward trying to formulate final conclusions and recommendations.
And if this meeting or if anyone not here reading this transcript believe that
Professor Swain has gotten anything wrong on the legal considerations or
missed any important considerations we want to hear from those folks as
well. We want to hear all points of view before we get to the final stages. Let
me go through these slides quickly because I think they're in some extent
redundant but maybe there's something here that I – that hasn't been said
yet.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 16

So the nature of IGO immunity from national jurisdiction there are different
approaches and different courts to IGO immunity and which is derivative of
the immunity accorded to nation states sovereign immunity IGOs being
organizations created generally by treaties between nation states or created
within the United Nations system which enjoys it's own immunity under
international law.
So the immunity's contextual. IGOs generally enjoy immunity under national
international law but different jurisdictions apply it differently. Their - the
decisions are often based on an organization's specific treaties to which not
all states are a party. And as we found out in worrying about Article 6T - why
don't you just let me finish this statement? I'll let you talk in a sec? That while
Article 6T well notification of WIPO generally provides protection international
trademark regimes to all signatories of the Paris convention and all nations
that are members of the World Trade Organization each of those nations
reserves the right to not recognizing immunity asserted by a given IGO if they
wish to. So there's – there can be a nation state which has its own immunity
can refuse to recognize the assertive community of a particular IGO and go
ahead with your comment or question please.
(John Passaro):

This is (John Passaro) from the OECD. Just so we don't lose the forest
through the trees here I just wanted to zoom out a little bit and point you to
Professor Swain's text on Page 15 just above Section B where he says that,
"little may ride on the distinction between absolute and functional immunity
and ultimately little may depend on the potential scope of immunity at all." So
while he did in the memo discuss that there are different approaches to IGO
immunities he said that in most context it wouldn't actually impact the final
immunity analysis at all. Thanks.

Brian Beckham:

Well that may be true. Different courts may arrive at the same destination
through different analytical tests. We were just trying to give folks the context
here. The - so as noted states interpret the obligations under treaties in

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 17

various ways and every jurisdiction, that is every national court system results
in immunity questions under its own law which is informed by but not dictated
by international law.
Then it goes through the as we've discussed that the UDRP and URS provide
either party if they're happy with the panelist decision to if they are available
law in a mutual jurisdiction as defined find under the UDRP and the URS they
can bring a de novo court action to question the action of the panelists. And
can we get the next slide please? I don't have any way to scroll here?
Okay so there are different approaches to immunity. There's absolute
immunity which is comprehensive immunity from judicial process irrespective
of the nature of the activity in question in the absence of an express waiver
by the IGO. There's restrictive immunity which is provides exception from
absolute immunity for litigation concerning commercial activities like those
undertaken by private parties.
And then we get into the question of whether the disputes that would be
subject we'd be considering here are they commercial disputes because
trademark is commercial law? Are they commercial disputes because they
involve the assertion of a commercial law type right or are they disputes
involving protection of an IGOs basic identity which would not be considered
a commercial dispute? And you can answer that question whichever way you
think is preferable.
And most states don't apply the restrictive immunity approach except the
United States which is a rather significant jurisdiction particularly given the
number of registrars and registries, significant ones located there and which
mutual jurisdictions may apply.
Then you have functional immunity which is you're looking at the function of
the IGO in question and trying to do decide whether the function is a critical
one or that this allegedly infringing domain interferes with the core mission of

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 18

the IGO whether it's something not as - not essential to the IGO essential
identity and mission. So next slide please?
And as noted outside the domain name area IGOs generally if they wish to
waive immunity do so through their governing instrument which would give
them the power to waive if they wish to and by way of an agreement or
pleading. And generally if an IGO has a problem and there's no other avenue
available other than a court proceeding it's up to them whether to live with the
problem or to bring a court action and in a sense by doing so waive their
immunity.
So and rather than search for it there is a passage later on in the Swain
memo which essentially I'm assuming it survived in the final version kind of
summarized all of this saying that for the purposes of this working group
there's no clear black and while legal principle that says that agreeing to the
mutual jurisdiction provision is a clear violation. And it becomes the policy
consideration, or policy question for this working group where we have to
balance all the separate considerations. And that's what we're going to be
doing going forward as we review in detail the Swain memo and then try to
reach final recommendations solutions on the questions posed under our
charter.
Petter Rindforth: Just Petter here. Just add from the (unintelligible) question from George
Kirikos while we have the university World Bank folks here do they intend to
respond to written questions from months ago, your written questions sent by
the PDP Working Group asking for formal feedback, data, et cetera? My first
question to you is have you seen this documentation? Yes please?
(John Passaro):

(John Passaro) again from the OECD. This seems to be a favorite question
that comes up at these meetings. The IGOs answered a number of questions
for a number of different parties in a number of contents. I believe that he's
referring to the last set of questions that were received some time ago. We
found that those same questions repeated much of the content that was

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 19

asked in earlier questions. And also the weight of the questions we're afraid
just made it totally clear that, you know, everyone was looking for a very
specific type of answer from us. So we decided it just wasn't fruitful to
respond. And in any event now you have most of the answers to your
questions in this Swain memo which it also sounds like people are reading
much differently than the IGOs have read it. Thanks.
Philip Corwin:

Okay. And I have found the passage I was thinking of from the prior memo.
It's at the top of Page 26 and in the section UDRP and its alternatives. And I'll
just read it. It's a very short passage.
The question of IGO immunity may be resolved at least in part outside
ICANN. To the extent that national courts were inclined to find that the matter
lies - that is the matter, the domain dispute lies outside a particular IGO's
immunity or that any immunity was waived by the IGO's governing
instrument. But in other cases though a national court might find that the
mutual consent affects the waiver of – and that is a waiver of the immunity
that would otherwise exist even though it otherwise be inclined to recognize
the IGO's immunity from judicial process. And so that's the case where the
IGO has immunity and basically has been compelled by following the UDRP
to waive it when they would rather not. And he says with respect to this latter
possibility ICANN confronts a policy question infused with legal principles. So
that's what we're going to be dealing with in the final stages of this working
group was how do we answer that policy question given the fact that the
answer on sovereign immunity would be viewed differently within different
jurisdictions.

Brian Beckham:

Thanks Phil, Brian Beckham again for the record. I think just to sort of zoom
out a little bit the question of jurisdiction and immunity is a complex one. I
think that's underscored very clearly in the Swain report. But I think
something that may be important to bear in mind and Professor Swain ends
with the suggestion that there's a policy decision to be made by ICANN. And I
just want to remind folks that yesterday I sat in a session where there was a

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 20

discussion of the trademark clearinghouse. And there were different ideas
about how to improve it for the future.
And an individual from the registries or Registrar Stakeholder Group -- I don't
remember -- suggested that whatever was looked at in terms of making
improvements or changes to the clearinghouse or suggested would be that
the parties that were impacted and that in that case the registries or the
registrars were asked how this would look to them and what types of changes
would either be problematic for them and would make things more
streamlined for them.
And I think here it's useful to bear in mind that the questions like my
colleague (John) from OECD mentioned IGOs via the GAC had been asked
some very detailed questions on a number of occasions and IGOs have
provided answers.
So when there's a policy question being put to the ICANN community I think
it's important that people who are making the decisions bear in mind the
feedback from the very impacted parties. And, you know, the truth is if there's
a reluctance for members of the working group or for the - from the
community to provide a curative rights protection mechanism for IGOs that
addressing these mutual jurisdiction and addressing these scope of rights
protection issues is desirable. And of course there's a way to get there. But
let's be clear about one thing, it ignores the feedback from the impacted
parties.
Petter Rindforth: Maybe just rephrase your conclusion there. How did you come up with that
story?
Brian Beckham:

Yes the point is this. IGOs - just to step back a little bit further. So IGOs
intergovernmental organizations are created by governments via treaties.
These are organizations that are conducing activities on behalf of
governments on behalf of global citizens that governments have deemed to

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 21

be in the public interest. These are funded by governments. These are
funded by citizens. IGOs have time and again expressed concerns about
certain aspects of their rights protection mechanism in the ICANN new gTLD
context. And what I'm suggesting is that when there are policy questions for
ICANN for the community to decide the feedback from the IGOs from the
impacted parties is taken into account.
Philip Corwin:

Let me respond which is that we - we're very happy to see you here in the
OECD and the World Bank and we take this whole question very seriously. I
think – I'm thinking for myself now but I think generally there's some
reluctance to given the history of creating the UDRP and creating the URS
which took several years it is if we do decide that weight the different factors
that there was a need to create a curative rights policy solely for the use of
the few hundred IGOs in the world it would take – that would be some
considerable additional undertaking to create that - what would be a– what
would have to be shown by the complainant, what would be the burden of
proof, what would be the POs mechanism and to which arbitrator, arbitration
organization, organizations in the absence of going to a court of mutual
jurisdiction if there was a disagreement with the initial decision.
So that weighs on us but we take the concerns and the viewpoints of the
IGOs very seriously but we are so – and the reason we've held – been on
hold for a year and reached out to a legal expert was to make sure we really
understood what the law on sovereign immunity was. We weren't going to
make it up.
And just to try and finish so we take IGO views very seriously. We also have
to be cognizant that registrants that sometimes there are wrong decisions by
panelists. Most of them are right but there are some situations where
reasonable people can disagree about whether a panelist reached the correct
decision. And those are the ones where, you know appeals are made to the
courts under the current system.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 22

I think it's a very rare instance, it'd be very rare to have a situation where IGO
brought an existing DRP action won it and the registrant really thought that he
had been so mishandled by the panelist that they would expend a very
considerable amount time and money to bring a "court appeal." But we want
to – so we're talking about a very tiny subset of potential complainants which
is the small, relatively small number of IGOs in the world compared to the
work that (unintelligible) to say of trademark owners which is much, much
larger, the number of actions that might be brought and the very tiny subset
or an appeal of some kind might be made.
So we take the IGO's viewpoints and interests very seriously but we also
can't just ignore the legal rights of registrants. And that's - we're going to be
attempting to balance all of that as we proceed to the final conclusions in this
working group. Yes sir?
(John Passaro):

(John Passaro) from the OECD once again. I'd just like to respond to a
couple of questions at the same. First so one question from you when you
talking about or statement that you made about the importance of making
policy decisions with regard to GTO's requirement to submit to a mutual
jurisdiction provision.
But the thing is that our member state governments when creating us already
made a policy decision. and that decision was that we were entitled to
immunities. The immunities are inscribed in conventions, it is an essential
part of our existence, it allows us to get our work done. And part of that is
because, as (Prof. Flaine) points out in this memo, that because we are
forced to operate in a jurisdiction of a given state, we are more vulnerable
than a state.
And then also responding to a statement made by (Mr. Caritose) saying that
IGOs are asking for rights that even governments don’t have. No, we have
rights that governments have given us and those governments have given us

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 23

those rights. Again, with an element that we need in order to be able to get
our work done. Thank you.
Petter Rindforth: Just have a little quick comment on that, first of all as he mentioned, we are
discussing dispute resolution, sorry for that, may not be used very often but
still it will exist when it’s needed and another working group where we are be considering carrying (unintelligible) and others. We have the (PDDRP) that
has not been used at all so far but still it is there when a topics came out. My
comments on the IGOs is that, so far what I’ve seen from the report and what
I have seen from some of the IGOs own policies, there may be a difference
on how they deal with legal issues. I mean, as we’ve seen from their report,
(UM) for instance, they’re having their - section that they can accept to set
accordance in a civil court action in a country.
And we also had some example of (unintelligible) court in some countries that
state that IGOs can still - they can be a patch in a normal dispute resolution.
So, correct if I’m wrong, but what I see from the report is a big gray zone, it’s
not completely 100% sure that an IGO automatically cannot take the case to
a civil court in a country or be sued by a counterpart in some country. So
that’s also why we are not, even with the support, we don’t have a final
conclusion or suggestion so every comment from you and these
organizations and from other patch are much welcome before we make our
initial report.
Philip Corwin:

Okay, I have two other comments and then take any - Mary at what time did
we schedule to wrap up here?

Mary Wong:

This session is scheduled to end at 3:00 PM today.

Philip Corwin:

Okay, so it’s 20 to three, we can keep it going as long as people want to keep
talking. But just two comments to add, one, you know, early in this
discussion, when this session began, I referred to - I tried to put this in
context, trying to define what this working group was doing and what the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 24

board was doing separately in conversations with the (GAC) and the IGO
group. Whatever - we have to wait to see what the Board’s final decision
there is but the extent of the Board provides any permanent protection,
whatever they might be, to IGOs at the top and second level.
The broader in scope those protections are, the less possibility there would
be of any dispute arising at the second level, we have to wait to see what
those are. So this is - it’s kind of difficult for us to - we can’t really balance that
factor until we know what the Board’s final action on that is going to be when
frankly we have seen that about a year ago. If those - if names and acronyms
(M through C) rather brought protection at the second level through board
decisions that would substantially limit the possibility of disputes rising that
would ever go to any type of curative rights process but we don’t know yet
what the Board decision -- which certainly be nice for this working group to
know that before we reach final conclusions.
And while we take very seriously that IGOs are created by governments and
are given immunity, to me that’s - the immunity is not absolute and we’ve
been trying to figure out - it’s like me saying, “Well, I’m a citizen of the United
States, I have constitutional rights and I - and particularly the ones given to
me in the Bill of Rights.” But as we know from Court decisions, none of those
constitutional rights is absolute, each of them is subject to limitations. And
what we found from (Prof. Flaine) is that while courts will defer, number one,
different jurisdictions will be with the scope of that immunity that’s been given
on IGO to be a broader narrative depending on how they look at the law in a
specific factual case -- just let me finish and you can respond.
And -- I lost my train-of-thought there -- that - oh yes, that IGOs always have
the option, if it’s to their benefit to waive the immunity for a specific situation if
they wish to. So I’ll stop there and welcome responses. We have - yes, go.
Go ahead, we have number of - I see (Phil Sheppard), (Jenna) with (UCD),
(Brian), were there others who wanted to speak? So.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 25

Petter Rindforth: Let me jump in, our (unintelligible) suggest (unintelligible) toward the end of
(Prof. Flaine’s) report, he’s making a concrete suggestion about a minor
change -- as I read it -- to the existing (EDRP) to allow for an arbitration
option. So…
Philip Corwin:

What page is that on at? It’s…

Petter Rindforth: It’s right towards the end, I think it’s the penultimate page. And I just thought
that might something worth airing to see if that was thought to be a concrete
and useful suggestion or if that had problems.
Philip Corwin:

And which suggestion is it specifically?

Petter Rindforth: Basically saying that - I mean, he quotes early in the report an example of
Apple who allow for arbitration in their causes in case of IGOs. Basically
suggests that as mechanism also that we could think of as a - if you’re an
IGO then you could go for arbitration option as an insertion to the existing
(EDRP) -- at least that’s how I read it. And I just thought it would be quite an
interesting proposal that could (unintelligible) all this good work.
Philip Corwin:

Yes, that’s what I’m saying response and let the other folks speak. The two
challenges with that are one, as I noted before, this would be an easy issue
to solve if it was just a relationship between ICANN and IGOs but this is third
party, the domain registering. The other thing we don’t know is whether - let’s
say hypothetically we decided that the possibility of being brought into a court
case in a court of mutual jurisdiction so offended, would we view it as the
recognized scope of IGO immunity that it shouldn’t be permitted and said that
for IGOs there should be either a new curative rights process or if the existing
ones the appeal, “Should not be to a court but should be to a designated
arbitration bodies.”
That would not prevent a domain name registering from nonetheless filing an
appeal, for example, (unintelligible) filing a suit under the anti-cyber squad

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 26

and protection - we don’t know whether the US Court would say, “Sorry,
you’re out of luck under the policy created by this organiza - this California
non-profit organization in ICANN, you’ve lost your rights to file a case in this
case - in this dispute under the (ACPA).” Or whether the Court would say,
“We’re not going to let some California nonprofit corporation strip you of your
statutory rights under US law.” We just don’t know what the answer would be
in that hypothetical.
Petter Rindforth: It may not matter.
Philip Corwin:

What’s that?

Petter Rindforth: I said, “It may not matter.” I think, you know, we do what we can as this
organization and you find out what happens in the real world later.
Philip Corwin:

I’m not saying that should determine that we shouldn’t take an action just
because we don’t know how a hypothetical legal situation, I’m just saying we
might take that action and find out that in some courts it hasn’t effectively
stopped the IGO from being counter-party in a judicial action.

Man 5:

I’d just like to echo the point you made earlier Phil, when you were stating
that, you know, we’re talking about an evidently small number of acronyms
here - (unintelligible) some of our names as well. So we’re talking about a
really, really, really small subset of disputes. So yes, I also agree with you
that it’s - we were just granted full protection at the second level as one
(unintelligible) away with this problem but it would also, again, get away with
a need for this incredible amount of energy that everyone is expending for
what’s going to be a relatively small number of (unintelligible) which however
I do have disproportionately large impact on us.
I’d also like to echo what was just said previously regarding the arbitration
option. We’ve been saying since the start that that is a potential solution.
Also, with regards to the question of absolute immunity, that is not the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 27

question here, that was never the question here. The question was, do - does
the scope of IGO immunities mean that we would be entitled to immunity in
this very specific context? And the answer from (Prof. Flaine), (unintelligible)
to be pretty clear, as you know -- Phil who’s also a lawyer -- there are no
slam-dunks in law, this is pretty close to a slam-dunk as I’ve seen in long
time. This is a very complex issue. Thanks.
Philip Corwin:

Let me (unintelligible) you’re oral input but I’d hope that organizations like
(LECD) and other IGOs would submit some written comments on this
(unintelligible) and tell us what you think is important, our conclusions with you think we should (unintelligible) and tell us if you think there’s anything
wrong or anything we missed that should be taken into consideration. We
want to get feedback from everybody on this memo before we move to final
decisions plan.

Brian Beckham:

Thanks Phil, Brian Beckham again. I just want to come back to something
that my colleagues from the (OECD) and World Bank mentioned earlier is
that in very practical terms there’s a simple way to prevent abusive IGO
names and acronyms in domain names and that’s simply borrowing the
registration by third parties of those names. Now, IGOs are cognizant of the
fact that when comes to trademark principals there’s legitimate coexistence
by actors around the world in different classes of bits and services. So in an
effort to appreciate that and compromise and come to a solution, we’ve come
to the proposal for a curative mechanism to address abuse, if it and when it
occurs.
But I just want to mention something, I think there’s a generalized concern
and I see it coming (unintelligible) in a lot of the comments in the chat and of
course we’ve been monitoring the discussions of this working group that
registering right in domain names which IGOs appreciate, in some cases, the
very valuable assets would be put at risk. IGOs are focused on providing
services to the public, during the ebola outbreak there were domain names
registered and Web sites put up and emails sent out that were specifically

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 28

intending to install malware on users’ computers. IGOs operate for the public
benefit, they don’t have trademark enforcement budgets, they don’t have
monitoring services.
But in the rare case where there is abuse, where there’s a risk of public harm
all that the IGOs are asking for is a means to address this. They’re not after
domain names. And I just want to offer maybe as a very practical solution
when it comes to in the (UDRP) context, a registrant who’s facing a (UDRP)
claim has the option to elect a three member panel in which case they can
elect a panelist who they feel would be sympathetic to their rights and to their
views and maybe one practical option would be in this context, if there are
legitimate concerns about domain names being taken from registrants.
Maybe one way to address that would be to address at the outset the option
for registrants to elect, even in a single member panel case, a panelist or if
it’s a panelist via appeal to arbitration who they thought would accurately
reflect the view of the law in specific terms of coexistence in their favor,
because I can assure that the intent here in IGOs being here is not to
displace the rights of domain name registrants; it’s solely to address harm to
the public and harm to the reputation of IGOs. And it’s one practical way to
address that would be to vest the registrant with some ability to impact the
panel composition, that might be a practical way forward.
Petter Rindforth: Just to make it clear. When we talk about this possible solution, are we still
talking about a new sort of big IGO (UDRP) or do you think it can be added to
the present (UDRP) where we also have to identify what IGOs are?
Brian Beckham:

I think, first of all, it’s not necessary to amend the (EDRP) for this purpose.
There’s a separate process in ICANN going on right now to look at rights
protection mechanisms which include the (EDRP), that’s a process that will
run it’s own course. And more to the point, there’s advice from the (GAC) and
the Los Angeles Communicate, which is very clear on this point, that in

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 29

providing a curative mechanism for IGOs that this should not require
amendment of the (EDRP), this should be a stand alone mechanism.
Philip Corwin:

Okay, and again, as I noted before, that - if it is the conclusion of this working
group that a new curative rights (unintelligible) for use by IGOs should be
created and we’re going to have to deal with all the questions of what has to
be shown by the complainant by what evidentiary standard and all the rest of
the considerations that come into creating a (CRP) at a whole clause.

Brian Beckham:

Thanks Phil, and this is (Brian) again for the record. I don’t mean to shortcut
all of the thinking that would go around that but people might be aware that -I don’t recall the exact date, someone from ICANN staff or from the council
might refresh my memory -- but about a decade ago there was actually a
draft produced by ICANN staff for precisely this type of mechanism.

Philip Corwin:

Yes, Mary.

Mary Wong:

Thanks Phil, this is Mary from staff. So just to follow up on (Brian’s) point that
I believe you’re referring to the draft - they made up in 2007, produced by
staff. Just a note for the record, that that was one of the background
documents for this working group and it is available for review. And
presumably when the working group gets to the point of discussing which
option it might pursue and what mechanisms and language, then it might
return to that document. Thank you.

Philip Corwin:

Good. Multiple times during this discussion reference has made to the other
working group that just started in March of this year, that’s revealing all right
protection mechanisms and all (DTLDs). I’m very familiar with that working
group because I’m one of the three co-chairs and just for people not familiar
with it, that working group has a very lengthy projected timeline of these onewhirl review. The rights protection mechanism created for the new (TLD)
program, the (PDDRP), which is the only one at the registry level and then at

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 30

the trademark clearing house, sunrise registration rights for trademark
owners, trademark claims notice and the uniform rapid suspension.
We project completing review about mid-year 2017 and producing a final
report on a new (TLD RPMs) at the end of next year. And then, just be
initiating the (EDRP) review and the (EDRP) has never been reviewed. It’s
the only ICANN consensus policy that has never been reviewed. That will
kickoff in early 2018, and we haven’t even dared to project how long that will
take. It’s because given the fact that there’s - well, just walking at the rightful
guidance to panelists, there’s so many potential issues in the (EDRP) that
could it be even longer than the new (TLD) reveal and it’s, as with all ICANN
work, everything is done very deliberately and every potential question is
addressed from both sides before.
And then if you circle back around after you’ve done them all and revise
preliminary conclusions. Now, the treatment of IGOs is not on the agenda for
that working group and I don’t - you know, I’m presuming that this one will be
finished well before the conclusion of that one and we’ll recommend whatever
we do. But again, it would be - and just going through this exercise, I think it
would be useful for this working group to query the Board as to - and there
was a discussion yesterday between the (GNSO) and Board members,
specifically on Red Cross and IGO protections kind of saying, “When are we
going to have a final decision by the Board? You’ve been looking at this stuff
for over two years.”
And there’s been indications before that they’re close to a conclusion and it’s
frustrating for this working group, I’m sure it’s frustrating for the (GAC) and
the IGOs that there’s no finality in that other process that relates directly to
ours because the extent of the protection finally decided upon by the board
will basically narrow or expand the scope of potential second level disputes
that would be the subject of either disputes in the existing curative rights
processes or in a new one if we went - go down that road.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 31

And it’s five to 3:00 now, so I’m going to stop talking and see if Petter has any
final thoughts and then if any of the participants in the room or on the chat, on
the phone have final comments to make and then we’re going to wrap it up
here. And thank you for your participation and hope that you continue to work
within our working group as we move on to the most important stage of our
deliberations.
Petter Rindforth: Thanks. To make a quick summary of the meeting today and the comments
we have got so far, we will definitely in our report, one of the suggestions
would be not to make changes in the current (EDRP) but if possible to - one
of the possibilities would be to create something similar but added that it
relates to identify IGOs, the protection of IGOs in that policy system. And also
to add an arbitration procedure. That said, I think what we also concluded
today is that even if that kind of dispute resolution policy for IGOs is created,
it cannot be 100% sure. Cases can be taken further to national courts
anyway, but then at least there is a specific system to use.
And as someone said, when there is a dispute resolution procedure or when
a specific name protection is mentioned in some regulations, hopefully it will
also have some limitation ratio on even organizations that plan to misuse this
kind of name protection. So Mary, what can we say about the next steps?
Mary Wong:

Thank you Petter, this is Mary Wong from ICANN staff. So the next steps, I
believe, will be for the working group having had a chance to review (Prof.
Flaine’s) opinion with input from the community, included all affected parties
to look at the various options that it may have and those would include
options for either modify existing procedures or potentially creating additional
procedures amongst other options, some of which were highlighted today.
I believe that the intent is to have that discussion immediately following this
meeting, at the next working group meeting or commencing the next working
group meeting and following that then the working group would have to go
back to other preliminary discussion and conclusions and work out language

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-28-16/4:56 am CT
Confirmation # 8995821
Page 32

for proposed preliminary recommendations which, I believe, the plan is to
have that done certainly before the next ICANN meeting in November.
Philip Corwin:

Great. So Mary am I correct that our projected date for the next meeting of
this working group is - one meeting on Thursday, now we’ve been moved to
Thursdays would be best (Field Day)July 14th?

Mary Wong:

This is Mary again. I believe that’s correct.

Philip Corwin:

Thank you. So again, if you have an interest in following the continuing
discussion and deliberations, mark your calendar for July 14th, that’s our next
meeting after this one of the working group where we’ll be going very
carefully through (Prof. Flaine’s) memo, his final version, and debating
exactly what it means and what conclusions we should draw from it and what
our next steps are and then start to move forward in whatever direction we
decide to go.

Petter Rindforth: With that we end for today. Thanks.

END

