GNSO Policy Development Process on IGO-INGO
Access to Curative Rights Protection Mechanisms:
Working Group Open Meeting
ICANN56 | 28 June 2016

Agenda for this open Working Group meeting
1. Welcome and introductions; brief update of the PDP scope and
status
2. Summary & discussion – IGO jurisdictional immunity:

Purpose

•

Implications for the PDP of legal expert research on differing
treatment by national courts of IGO jurisdictional immunity –
absolute, restrictive, functional

•

Implications for the PDP of legal expert view of the likely effect of the
Mutual Jurisdiction clause (as found in the UDRP and URS) on IGO
jurisdictional immunity

3. Discussion of legal expert and other suggestions on possible
reforms and options for the policy problem presented
4. Next steps

•

WG will review ICANN56 discussions and feedback, especially in
light of earlier preliminary conclusions on standing and scope of
the existing curative rights processes

•

WG intends to develop preliminary recommendations by
ICANN57

Next Steps

| 3

Overview and Brief Update

What is the status of this PDP?

About this PDP

Status of work

WG chartered by GNSO
Council to examine:
• Whether existing curative
rights processes – the
Uniform Dispute
Resolution Policy and the
Uniform Rapid
Suspension dispute
resolution procedure –
should be modified to
address the specific needs
of International
Governmental Organizations
(IGOs) and International
Non-Governmental
Organizations (INGOs), and
if so, how; or
• Whether a new, narrow
procedure is needed

• Preliminary conclusion to focus on IGOs (not
INGOs)
• Possible standing to file may be based on Article
6ter of the Paris Convention (note that this should
not create additional legal rights)
• External legal expert retained to provide opinion
on state of international law on IGO jurisdictional
immunity

Background information
• GNSO webpage with Issue Report, WG Charter &
Council resolutions:
http://gnso.icann.org/en/groupactivities/active/igo-ingo-crp-access
• WG online collaborative wiki with recordings and
transcripts of all meetings and draft documents:
https://community.icann.org/x/37rhAg

| 5

IGO Jurisdictional Immunity – Report of the
External Legal Expert and Discussion

1. Nature of IGO Immunity from National Jurisdictions – Absolute, Restrictive,
Functional (1)
Immunity	is	contextual - IGOs	generally	enjoy	immunity	under	international	law,	but	
different	jurisdictions	apply	the	law	differently,	and	even	within	the	same	jurisdiction	
different	IGOs	may	be	treated	differently:
•
•

Immunity	 obligations	 vary	by	state	and	by	IGO	concerned
Immunity	 decisions	are	often	based	on	organization-specific	 treaties	to	which	not	all	states	are	
party

•
•

States	subject	to	the	same	international	obligations	 may	implement	 them	in	varying	ways
Every	jurisdiction	 resolves	immunity	 questions	 according	to	its	own	law	(the	“law	of	the	forum”,	 as	
informed	 by	international	 law)

The	UDRP	and	URS	compel	consent	to	a	Mutual	Jurisdiction	(either	the	domain	name	
registrar	or	registrant):
•

An IGO that files a Complaint will therefore have agreed to the possibility of a judicial
process, regardless of any immunity it might otherwise enjoy under international law

| 7

1. Nature of IGO Immunity from National Jurisdictions – Absolute, Restrictive,
Functional (2)
Absolute immunity:
• Comprehensive immunity from judicial process, irrespective of the nature of the
IGO’s activity, in the absence of an express (and strictly construed) waiver
• Example – the United Nations, other IGOs protected in certain States by specific
treaties binding those States, or bilateral arrangements between States
Restrictive immunity:
• An exception from absolute immunity for litigation concerning commercial activities
like those undertaken by private parties
• Relatively few States have applied this approach to IGOs (exception – the USA)
Functional immunity:
• Immunity limited by the functions of the IGO in question
• Example – language such as IGOs will enjoy the “privileges and immunities as are
reasonably necessary for the fulfilment of their functions”
• Can overlap with a restrictive immunity approach, but distinction may be critical –
e.g. non-infringing use of its domain is necessary for IGO to carry out its mission
| 8

2. Does agreement to Mutual Jurisdiction mean the IGO has waived its immunity?
Outside the domain name area, how do IGOs generally waive immunity?
• Through the IGO’s governing instrument (though scope of this is unclear); or
• By way of agreement or pleading (case law not well developed, but agreeing to a
Mutual Jurisdiction could be interpreted as a waiver)
Legal expert opinion:
“Allowing an IGO that prevailed in the UDRP process to avoid its waiver and rest on
the UDRP result by invoking immunity, while allowing it to waive that immunity by
initiating judicial proceedings if it loses to a domain-name registrant, will likely seem
asymmetrical and unfair.”
QUESTION FOR DISCUSSION:
If agreeing to Mutual Jurisdiction means an IGO has waived any jurisdictional
immunity it may be entitled to in that particular national court, should this PDP
consider alternatives that could address this specific issue?
| 9

3. What are the policy options for any possible modification?
(A) Maintain status quo, possibly with slight adaptation:
•

An IGO may be able, according to the law of its seat, to assign a right of use to another (or,
at least, to appoint an agent to enforce its interest)

•
•

ICANN may need to specifically allow for this in the applicable policy/procedure
But assignments may not always be valid –
o

Will need to be drafted carefully

o

Could be interpreted as falling outside scope of that IGO’s immunity under a restrictive or
functional approach

o

Could be ruled ineffective as a transfer of rights

(B) Use an arbitral or third party non-judicial process:
• Familiar to IGOs in contractual disputes or under the United Nations Commission on
International Trade Law (UNCITRAL) Rules
• But domain name disputes are not contractual arrangements – requiring registrants to agree
to such an appeal process could lessen a legitimate registrant’s freedom
• Could also be challenged in some courts as creating a further exception to IGO immunity

| 10

4. Are there other alternatives? (1)
(A) Make a distinction among the different types of IGOs:
• Maintain existing Mutual Jurisdiction terms in general, but permit particular IGOs
to elect instead to submit to arbitration (according to UNCITRAL or some similar
procedure)
(B) Rewrite Mutual Jurisdiction clause without prejudging immunity:
• IGO	immunity	not	to	be	assumed	in	circumstances	where	the	relevant	jurisdiction	would	
not	be	inclined	to	afford	it	e.g.	its	courts	apply	a	functional	or	restrictive	approach	and	
regard	the	activity	as	beyond	immunity’s	scope.	
•

Additional	 language	(exception)	could	be	added	as	follows:
o

“	…	in	the	event	the	action	depends	on	the	adjudication	of	the	rights	of	an	international	intergovernmental	
organization	 that	would,	but	for	this	provision,	be	entitled	to	immunity	from	such	judicial	process	according	
to	the	law	applicable	in	that	jurisdiction,	[as	established	by	a	decision	of	a	court	in	that	jurisdiction,]	the	
challenge	must	be	submitted	instead	for	determination	[by	UNCITRAL	in	accordance	with	its	rules”

| 11

4. Are there other alternatives? (2)
(C) Alleviate hardship caused by registrant submission to an arbitral/nonjudicial process
• E.g. IGO could agree to bear some of the costs if it elects arbitration
o Needs to be carefully formulated to avoid problems with enforceability

(D) Others?
What are the next steps from here?

| 12

