HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 12:00 to 12:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Gema, are you ready? Yes, great. Because we have one last
session before our lunch break.
Thank you.
Which is same same but different, as people say in Thailand. It's
similar to what we discussed yesterday but it's not exactly the
same. It's about the three-character codes as TLDs. While we
had two-character codes as SLDs yesterday, so it sounds similar
but it is slightly different.
And I'd like to hand over to Gema from Spain. She has been
spending quite some time and energy in dealing with this issue,
and thank you very much, Gema, for taking over.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you. We have a brief presentation. Can it be uploaded?
Meanwhile, and not to lose time, I will try to focus the discussion
on this issue by separating it from yesterday's conversation.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

Today we are dealing with any domain name, second-level
domain name, that is registered under a three-letter code, which
could be supposedly a new new gTLD.
The issue here is to what extent three-letter codes, specifically
codes in the ISO3166 Alpha-3 codes could be registered as new
gTLDs.
This possibility was excluded in the Applicant Guidebook. So no
applicant could apply for ISO3166 Alpha-3 code. For instance,
the one for Spain is ESP.
Now there is a working group, joint, Cross-Community Working
Group sponsored by ccNSO and GNSO that was formed to study
the feasibility of allows three-letter codes as gTLDs in future new
gTLD rounds.

They will also study the feasibility of having

country names as top-level domains, but they have not started
the study on this issue. They are now focusing on three-letter
codes.
So this working group sent a questionnaire to different SOs and
ACs in the month of September last year to gather input as to
whether these three-letter codes to be allowed or not.
The questionnaire covered all three-letter codes. Not only the
ones on the ISO list. And covered, also, three-letter codes in IDN
characters, not only ASCII characters.

Page 2 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

The GAC replied to that questionnaire on December last year.
We provided initial input, and that initial intellectual property
reflected the variety of views among GAC members.
I underline some of the statements that were supported by most
of the GAC members.
We, as the GAC, or most -- sorry. Most GAC members showed
support for keeping the current protection; that is, keeping
three-letter codes aside from being delegated as gTLDs. And the
reason why is because many GAC members think that there is a
strong association among users between those three-letter
codes and the corresponding country or territory, and that risk
of confusion should be avoided. The confusion could extend
also to the ccTLDs. The user could not be able to tell whether
that domain -- that top-level domain is a ccTLD or is a gTLD,
because in his mind, he would associate that letter code, threeletter code, with a country.
It's important to note that of three-character names, there are
17,576 combination -- possible combinations, and ISO codes
only account for 300. So 300 names could be out of -- out of the - of their use as gTLDs.
In Marrakech last March, this Joint Working Group issued a socalled straw woman paper with a possible approach to the
release of those three-character combinations as gTLDs. So in

Page 3 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

this paper, they explained the reasons why in future rounds
three-letter codes, ISO three-letter codes -- they are only dealing
in this straw woman proposal with ISO three-letter codes -could be available as gTLDs.
The work -- The GAC working group on geo names, the one that
is chaired by Olga Cavalli, I don't think she is here now, has
prepared a response to this straw woman paper. And in this
paper, we explain the reasons -- in this response, we explain the
reasons why the current protections should be upheld in next
rounds.
As this response has been prepared by a working group, it is
submitted now to the whole GAC for endorsement following the
guidelines for the operation of working groups in the GAC.
So the questions that are put forward to you now is to comment
on this -- this response, this draft response that has been sent to
you with the briefing package, or not. Maybe -- Olga distributed
it on the mailing list, but it is available to anyone.
And then I think there is a session on the protection of country
and other geographic names tomorrow, although I'm not sure if
this session is hosted by the working group that I have been
talking about, the Cross-Community Working Group.

But it

could be an opportunity for interested members to express their
views as regards to this issue.

Page 4 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

And I remind that there are six GAC members that are following
this cross-constituency working group, but you are -- others are
also invited to join this working group and defend their
positions.
So with that, I open the floor to you, to hear from you on this
draft response, whether you support it or not. And that's all.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Just one thing. Thank you very much, Gema. Since we have a
little bit more time for this session, and remembering that
yesterday's session on the two-character codes on second-level
domain, there were many requests for the floor -- in particular,
from developing countries -- I would suggest that we use the last
ten minutes or 15 minutes, depending on how this goes, to give
the floor to those who have not been able to speak and express
their views on the two-character codes discussion of yesterday,
because that was very short and we had to cut the line of
speakers, and that is unfortunate.
So those who have wanted to take the floor on that yesterday, I
think we should give you at least ten minutes at the end of this
session to make your voices heard.
So thank you, and I give back to Gema. And the floor is open to
you.

Page 5 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

EN

I see Denmark, Sweden.
So Denmark, please.

DENMARK:

Thank you. And thank you for the presentation.
We have put some comments in the process and received some
answers on Friday. And we still have some comments to the
proposal. So we will propose a certain amendment to it.
I can say -- I can say what the oral suggestion will be.
First of all, if I understood you right, and you said yourself, that
the straw woman's paper was only on the ISO codes. So I think
our response should only focus on the ISO codes. So that is one
thing.

Other three-letter codes seems also, in one way or

another, to be mentioned here and included.
The other point is that it is still stated that there is sovereignty
issues connected with this, and I have -- I have difficulty to see
what kind of sovereignty issues which are involved here. So we
would like to see that that part of the proposal will be deleted.
And on the second page, the two last points, I have difficulty to
see what we are aiming at. The first part of bullet -- the last
bullet, and the bullet before that. Especially, to be frank, I don't
Page 6 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

understand the contractual restriction to use of top-level
domain names consisting of ISO codes are difficult to enforce. I
don't know. If it's contractual, why couldn't it be enforced? So I
really don't understand the first part of it, and we think it would
be appropriate to delete it. The same with the last bullet and
the first part of that bullet in our view should also be deleted.
Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Sorry, Finn. Could you repeat what parts of the last -- of your
last comments, what do you think should be deleted? Can you
repeat that, please?

DENMARK:

Yes. If you take the last bullet, then delete from "the
importance" and down to "fair," "we can have fair, transparent,
and appropriate policies." So the first part of that. And also on - on the bullet above, if we delete the first part of it, "contractual
restrictions" and down to "on the other hand," "then on the
other hand" should be rephrased. So that is what we would like
to see deleted.
We would also like to see deleted any reference to sovereignty
issues because we don't understand that, and we will also like

Page 7 of 31

EN

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

that the paper only focuses on the ISO codes. I think it's clearer
now.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you for clarifying. Then I have Sweden and Iran. And then
Norway. Sweden declines. So next Iran. Kavouss?

IRAN:

Yes. Thank you, Gema. Are you dealing with the two -- the ccTLD
to the use of the ccTLD in the second level or you're talking of
the two letters? Which one you're discussing?

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Now we are on the top-level.

IRAN:

When there is a proposal to delete something, you just take your
proposal but don't delete it directly because we have to agree to
delete something. I don't think that on the proposal we should
delete or retain. This is number one.
Number two, we had at various occasions mentioned.
That we have difficulty with the principle used in the ICANN for
that. As you mentioned yesterday, we need explicit agreement
of the country but not implicit agreement.

Page 8 of 31

If there's any

EN

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

question or request and after deadline of two months there is no
reply, this should not be considered as agreement. Because of
the difficulty of developing countries.

I am developing

countries. We have difficulty to reply within the two months.
This should not be understood or construed that we agree. It
should be construed that disagreement further to discussions.
This is very serious problems. And as mentioned yesterday,
there are many things that are the top-level domains used for
people, they want to use the, for instance, .IR for some things,
for the strings, that we don't agree with that. You remember
that the GAC had this agreed in one string totally, but NTIA was
given to that, saying that this is the situation. We don't oppose
to what has been done before. But this is very serious issue. The
resale is very serious issue. You give it to someone, you agree,
but you don't know who sell it to someone else. The abuse is
very important.

So as I mentioned yesterday, we need to

indicate that this is still under discussions. We have not yet
completed. What you mentioned yesterday is important. We
need to inject the explicit agreement rather than implicit
agreement. And we need to discuss the issue of resale, issue of
the abuse, and many other things.
completed. Thank you.

Page 9 of 31

So this issue is not

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

EN

Norway and Indonesia. After Norway, if you don't mind, I would
like to comment on what Denmark has said. Yeah, but Norway
now.

NORWAY:

Yes. Thank you, Gema. We just want to -- we support in general
this -- this paper to be -- before we can agree on minor changes.
That's not a problem. But I think it's important in our view to
focus on the main issue that this document says, that the threeletter country codes can be strongly associated with relevant
country and the existing ccTLDs. And therefore, the conclusion
is very important, that we do not want to lift the protection of
the current three-letter country codes. I think that's the main
issue and in our view that's -- that's very important. And also we
want to underline that also in light of all the discussions we have
had on protection of country and territory names in general, I
think it would be not wise at all to open up for new top-level
domains for these three-letter codes. So I just want to again say
that the conclusion in this paper is quite important to maintain
the current protection of the three-letter country codes. Thank
you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you. I take note that Netherlands is asking for the floor. I
would like to react quickly to some of Denmark's comments.

Page 10 of 31

EN

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

About the sovereignty issue, Iran gave me an example. The
sovereignty concerns over three-letter codes are mentioned
here because many countries consider this so intertwined with
their identity that they think it is a sovereign right of the country
to decide whether others should use the identifier for the
country or not. This is mentioned here because of that reason.
But there is also another reason.

The position of Iran, for

instance, is that they could require explicit consent by the
country to use that domain name, that TLD.
If you remember the Applicant Guidebook geographic TLDs
needed the recommendation of support or not objection by the
relevant government. What happens if a territory which is not
an independent one is applied by a registry to become a gTLD?
If the rule is maintained, ICANN could require a recommendation
of support or non-objection by the relevant government. In case
of disagreement between the -- the colony, so to say, and the -the mother country, the metropolis, ICANN could have a very
difficult decision to make and that could affect especially ICANN.
This is the second reason why sovereignty issues are mentioned
here, because we don't want ICANN to get into trouble with -with countries in this respect. And the contractual restric -- the
difficulty to enforce contractual restrictions is because in the
proposal, in the straw woman paper, they say that -- their
conclusion is that three-letter codes could be used as gTLDs on

Page 11 of 31

EN

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

the condition that the legal entity applying for the string must
not market the TLD in competition with the existing twocharacter TLD. That condition, we think that it's difficult to
enforce. How can you determine that the gTLD in this case is
being used in competition or with the intention to cause
confusion with the ccTLD.

It requires somewhat subject --

subjective judgments. And what happens if a ccTLD registry
wants to apply for that three-letter code?

Could that be

prevented from using it as a ccTLD or what happens if a
government applies for the corresponding three-letter code?
Could not be the government allowed to use that name for
geographic purposes or whatever? That's the reason why it is
stated that these contractual restrictions would be difficult to
deal with. I pause here, and I have Indonesia.

INDONESIA:

Yes. Thank you, Gema. Yesterday you mentioned that if a new
two-letter names is proposed and so on and the country needs
time to consider that -- yeah, sorry. Yesterday you mentioned
about if two-letter is proposed and the countries cannot
respond in the time there will be a problem and yesterday you
mentioned that silence doesn't mean agreement. And because
of that, my friend from Iran also mentioned that sometimes in
some countries they may need more than two weeks or three
weeks or whatever to respond. Now, I would like to know what

Page 12 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

is your group's idea to overcome this because some countries
might need more than a few more weeks to do that, to respond.
And even in some countries may not be able to respond as well
for many reasons, then we have to find out a way out for that.
Secondly, like Mr.-- the previous speaker, Mr. Jonathan
mentioned about the accreditation, it's -- in your group you also
do something like considering accreditation system for the
ccTLD operators.

If the operators cannot -- or the country

cannot respond in a few weeks and so on, that will also affect
some sort of accreditation of the TLD operators like what
Jonathan mentioned just a few moments ago about
accreditation that can affect a country if they give information to
the law enforcement agencies which is not in line with the
regulations. Okay, thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

About the time needed by governments to express their views on
the use or their identifiers, I don't think that's the issue right now
on three -- on the use of three-letter codes as TLDs. We are just
thinking whether we want the current protection to be lifted or
not. This is a simple decision or -- not simple but it's a simple
question to ask. We are not now asking whether governments
should react or not. Just simply there is a prohibition on the
Applicant Guidebook and the proposal put forward by the cross-

Page 13 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

constituency working group is to lift it. And we are discussing
here whether to lift it or not. So I think your question now is -- is
not very relevant. But I can take you -- take that up with you
bilaterally if you wish.
And on the second question of accreditation, I'm awfully sorry
about that. I don't really understand what you mean. But again,
as time is of the essence, I can try to understand it bilaterally
with you afterwards.
Then I have the Netherlands.

NETHERLANDS:

Yes, thank you, Gema. I agree completely with your last remarks
in the sense I was going to say this also. The question now is as
you said, do we need a decision on this? No, we don't need a
decision. We just have to convey our concerns on the potential
lifting of, let's say, this restriction. And, again, I think we -- one
thing I'm missing is what is the need?

Are there special

applications or registry business plans who would meet this
lifting? And then we can talk further, I think, because then we
can look at whether we should accommodate these. It's not like
the general decision, "Okay, let's lift one restriction." So I would
like to know more about, yeah, let's say, what kind of
communities or maybe ISO countries because I could expect
that in one country, one ccTLD is saturated and you might need

Page 14 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

a second code to alleviate and to give more of your habitants or
businesses more chances to register the name. So there could
be a lot of things that are behind it. But I don't understand still
the need for it. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Japan.

CHINA:

It's China.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

I'm so sorry. Go ahead.

CHINA:

Thanks. Thanks, Gema. First of all, thank you for leading this
work in GAC. And at present stage on this issue, we have quickly
go through the paper, very quickly, very brief, but not go into
detail very much.
Presently, we are of the view on this issue that the three-letter
country codes should be protected for sure and should be
associated with two-letter country code unless a country or a
particular territory has open view on its own three-letter country
code, unless a particular country or territory is open for its own
country code. That's it. Thank you.

Page 15 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

EN

Thank you. Thank you, Netherlands, as well. I didn't thank you
before.
Sweden, please.

SWEDEN:

Thank you, Gema. So getting up to speed, we're asked to react
on a proposal that came on Friday which was before this
weekend, which gives us very -- very little time. It's not very
satisfactory.
As a general comment, Sweden is positive to make use of threeletter codes. We can see that some countries have issues with
that, but we would be interested in finding a way of doing that.
It has been possible for two-letter codes on second level. So we
believe it should be possible to do three-letter codes on top level
as well.
Whether or not we support to give this as comments from the
GAC, it doesn't seem to me from reading the paper that it has the
shape and form to be handed over as GAC comments or GAC
input. It looks more like an internal character. So for us it's hard
to support this as a response at this time. Thank you.

Page 16 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

EN

Thank you, Sweden.
Iran, please.

IRAN:

Thank you, Gema. The question is as follows. You mentioned a
very constructive and simple way protection to be retained or to
be lifted.
There are three options. Option one, the issue is still under
study until we finish our study.
Option two, it could be lifted for those countries that they
explicitly announce that the ccTLD does not require protection
in this area.
Third, you put it that the delegation of that should be subject to
explicit agreements of the countries. So there is no black and
white. There are many options between the three things but
perhaps one which say that could be lifted with respect to those
who announce explicitly that they have no disagreement with
respect to the lifting or waiving the protection. That simplifies
the issue of many countries who have no problems and also
simplifies the countries that have difficulties, difficulties that
they have not yet -- the issue has not yet been studied, many
issues, abuse, (indiscernible), and many other things.

Page 17 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

So I don't think that you have a simple answer yes or no. There
are a variety of options. So maybe I come back to my first option
that still the issue is under study. And we could also indicate
that to the ICANN board, that do not decide on this until the
study is completed and they have clear advice from GAC in one
way or another. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you. Thank you very much, Iran.
There was one at the back. Are you Mr. Morris? Okay. You have
the floor.

TAIWAN:

Thank you, Gema. I'm Morris Lin Mao-Shong from Taiwan. This
is my first GAC meeting. I'm very glad to hear so many different
opinions. Like many other colleagues say, Taiwan also believe
people tend to naturally associate some three-character country
code with some specific country so that the location of a threecharacter code as a TLD should be more careful. It is important
to balance public interest in the business demand, and we
understand it takes time to find a mutually beneficial solution.
We appreciate and welcome the starting point for discussion in
the strawman paper.

Page 18 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

However, for the time being, we think the (indiscernible) of
applicant guidebook is still a good one before we find a better
approach. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you very much.
Now, I have Wanawit from Thailand.

THAILAND:

Thank you. I will make it brief. I also do support what Iran
proposed. We have to be in the study stage, especially the
experience we have on application guidebooks.
I have a concern on the procedures of geographicals, especially
the terms they use, that the applicant should have the
agreements or support or non-objection from the relevant
government agency.
The problem there is that if you read the next clause, there's no
obligation. They use the words "applicant may consult GAC
representative." Which relevant government? And you will find
out they can go to the ministry of something that's not related to
the Internet at all. They aren't aware of the public policies that
led to this. They can go to the Ministry of Livestock or Ministry of
Agricultures and get the support letters. Is that government

Page 19 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

agency who is going to tell it is relevant? And there are no
specific clauses specifying to the applicant that they must
consult the GAC. I don't get the reasons why they don't put
application there. In the country that do not have the GAC, I fully
understand who are going to make a decision on which relevant
governments involved that can issue the support, a nonobjection letter. In Thailand case, we are used to dealing with
six ministers, each issue non-objection letters. None of them is
coming from the Ministry of ICT.
That are some of the aspects. It's very early stage if we adopt
the geographical chapters and using the terms specified in the
application guidebook -- because this is not the geographical as
a whole country. And for our legal frameworks, we start working
out this. Even have to go to the parliament because that's the
only way because it treat as the agreements between no matter
it's private entity or somebody against the national asset, that
you need to go through the parliament. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you, Thailand.
The last persons in the queue are Norway and Gabon, if I'm not
mistaken. And then we need to finish this discussion to leave
some room for the other issue.

Page 20 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

Norway.

NORWAY:

Thank you. Thank you, Gema. When you went through all the
different types of potential, say, difficulties that we might go into
if we lift this, I think it's interesting to see that it is -- a lot of
issues is not how governments have said yes or no and it's about
other issues that I think we need to think more about before we
lift something. This is about lifting. This is about changing the
current situation, which for now is preserving some sort of
system of a distinction between the CCs and the gTLDs.
And I think if we also are commenting on the comment from Iran
that we have all kind of different solutions, yes, we have. But we
will also create kind of, I think, more chaotic system or not a
system or destroy the current system of the CCs and the Gs that
are -- they have different agreements with ICANN. They are, in
fact, different in nature. And we will see a more complicated mix
of those if we lift the current situation.
So for now, we think it's better to preserve it as it is. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Gabon, please.
Thank you, Norway.

Page 21 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

GABON:

EN

Good morning to everyone. Thank you, Chair. We don't have
much time.

But we have been closely following all the

interventions on such a delicate issue. And I would like to
express my support to Iran's proposal to have more time to give
an answer to this topic. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you for your concise comment.

There is one more

comment from a remote participant.

REMOTE INTERVENTION:

Yes, thank you, Chair. It is from Estonia, Timo Vohmar, stating
that Estonia would like to start using it's three-letter country
code, which is EST, and also stating that we also think that the
three-letter codes are available as long as the country is not
explicitly declared their non-interest in the country should be
considered as ccTLD instead of as a gTLD. I hope that was clear.
Thank you. End of comment.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

We were to wrap up, but there was a hand at the back. Who is it?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

It's me.

Page 22 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Okay.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

We also support Iran's proposal that we need more time to
provide an answer. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Thank you. I think there is some indication about where
potential concerns may be in terms of that every country in the
end should be able to do with this as it wants as big idea. Those
who want to use it should be able to use it. Those who want to
keep it or give it to somebody else so that, basically, the
sovereignty of the country to decide what to do with that name
is something where we may go towards something that we
could agree.
The question is: Where are we in terms of the time line? Is this -are we supposed to give advice to the board now? Or would we
rather address something to the cross-community working
group that is dealing with country and territory names, which is
organizing the session that I think we also participate -- is it
tomorrow or today? This afternoon? It's tomorrow afternoon.

Page 23 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

So I'm not fully clear, to be honest, whether it makes sense to
give advice to the board now or whether we should rather
engage with this working group and whoever else has an
interest in this.
So, Iran, maybe you have a clear vision on what the next steps
are.

IRAN:

Thank you, Thomas. Yes, you are right we should not open -remain open this issue for years. So we have to have some time
frame. Perhaps we specify that at our next meeting. Perhaps
GAC will have a reply to that. For the time being, you have to
study whether you study giving it to the working group or not.
But that is something that among those study, the option 2 that I
mentioned is a valid option. People put disclaimer that they
don't want to be used or disclaimer another way, that they have
no problem to be used. That is one option.
But we do not give it right now. We further study to see whether
there are other options, but we establish a time frame. Next
meeting in Hyderabad we will give reply to the ICANN, to an
appropriate GAC advice. In the meantime, we study.
The way how to study is up to you and up to the chair of the
group and so on and so forth to the discuss the options that I

Page 24 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

have mentioned plus many other options. But we have to get it
informed to the ICANN that for the time being, no action should
be taken in this regard.

We don't want to be before fait

accompli, things has been done. No. Get hold. Don't do
anything. Wait for us. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Before giving you the floor, if I remember right, we
have received a letter at some point in time from the working
group that was asking us about some questions from the threeletter codes. And I think Norway prepared the draft, answered
our proposal. That wasn't picked up because we are all buried
with IANA transition and other stuff. So I think we have never
really answered that letter. So I think the first step would be to
engage -- Karine, am I right or am I wrong?
We answered it so we gave a first reply. Have we received a reply
on our reply? No.
Okay. So but I think the next step would be to engage as many
of us as can in the discussion, and then I know that, Olga, you
are going to say that you're the only one so far that has been
participating in the working group. Are we now more in the
working group?

Page 25 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Of course.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Chair.

EN

First of all, I would like to mention and to thank Norway and
other countries, and Greece, but the most important thing is to
thank Gema for her magnificent work with this issue because I
was very busy with other things and she catch up with all this,
drafting this document.
So many thanks, Gema, for this.
I think we should -- we should give some messages to the -- to
the cross-community working group and I am not sure if perhaps
we -- we should include something in the communique that we
are reviewing this and this is an important thing for countries.
I'm not sure if we still have a definitive idea of what the whole
GAC wants, but some message should be sent.
And no, I'm not the only one in the cross-community working
group. Also Greece is participating, so they helped me through
the IANA process. Thank you.

Page 26 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Very briefly, Norway, if you still want --

NORWAY:

Well, yeah. Thank you.

EN

Just a quick comment. I think we also agree with Olga that we
should provide a response, at least some views in what direction
the GAC wants this to be.
And just a quick comment to also support what Iran was saying.
We are not defining how and when to go forward. This is a crosscommunity working group that we must actually respond into,
to be able to interact, because they will then just go ahead and
decide and recommend to the GNSO and then they will start to
actually do this.
And then the next issue this cross-community working group is
going to discuss is opening up the country and territory names
as top-level domains, not only the three-letter country codes.
So we need to convey some ideas that we have to be cautious
about lifting current protection, et cetera, in light of all the
discussion we have had on protection of geographic names in
general or -- or names or three-letter associated with our
territories.

Page 27 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

So one -- some kind of response, we should at least give. Not
possibly, of course, a conclusion or the one way forward, but
some concerns, at least, we should convey from the GAC. I think
I've heard a lot of concerns about how to protect certain issues,
if this is going to be lifted, so I think there is a consensus that we
-- we have that, of course, as you said, shared that some
countries want to use it as CCs. I think many countries do not
want to use it as CCs. But of course this cross-community
working group is discussing how to use these three-letter codes
as generic top-level domains, not as CCs. That's not on the table
yet. So thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you. Thank you very much. I understand from this
conversation that the GAC as a whole doesn't endorse the
response that has been drafted but I have a procedural
question.
Could it be possible for the GAC geo names working group to
send that response on their own behalf, as a GAC working group,
to the CCWG, or is this not possible?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Well, the working groups, first of all, they would need to discuss
and adopt the text as a draft that they would put up for

Page 28 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

discussion, but I think the first step is, let's go to that meeting
tomorrow. Let's discuss -- bring these issues up with regard to
three-letter codes, with regard to country names, because in the
end the principle is the same. You -- countries want to decide
themselves what they do with the names that they think are
linked to them, whether it's a two- or three- or four- or five- or
whatever letter code. The principle, in the end, is the same. And
engage with the working group and see where they are, and
then I think we can have a discussion what is the best way, time
line, and format, to engage.
But I think we will know more after tomorrow's discussion, if we
participate in that, if I can leave it here.
We are five minutes over but I still would like to give the
opportunity, if there is a wish for one or two statements
regarding the two-letter code discussion on second-level, if
there's -- somebody wants.
Iran, please be short. Make your points. Thank you.

IRAN:

Yes.

Short, making my points, the same procedure, same

problem stays with the alpha 2 and alpha 3 codes, so the same
procedures. We should say we are studying that but I still

Page 29 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

believe that we should indicate in a qualifying manner some
time frame. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran.
Other requests on the two-letter codes on second level?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes, Olga.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Chair. If there are other countries that would like to
also be part of the GAC representation in the cross-community
working group of use of country and territory names as TLDs, it
could be great.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you for that clear message.
Other requests?
So I think this is the end of this session, but please note that the
two-character code discussion on second-level domains is at a

Page 30 of 31

HELSINKI – Three-Character Codes as Top Level Domains (TLDs)

EN

different stage in process. They have already -- there have been
release requests and so on, whereas what we've been discussing
so far is something where there has -- no decision has been
taken on how to deal with this in the future so we have to -- it's
similar reasoning, it's similar concerns behind it, but there are
different processes and there are different stages, so we have to
be careful in the details.
So with this, I'll let you go and have dinner. Lunch. Sorry.
[ Laughter ]
In French, it's different. So -- and we meet at 1:30, so it's a short
break, but it's a short meeting, so we can also have short breaks.
Okay. Thank you very much. See you soon.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 31 of 31

