HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 08:15 to 09:15 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

ALICE MUNYUA:

Good morning: Good morning, everyone. Thank you very much
for coming this early to this GAC working group session, the
Public Safety Working Group.
We have an agenda set up, which is going to be a quick update
on a few of the activities that the Public Safety Working Group
has been following up on. And then we're going to spend a little
bit of time to prepare for the privacy -- proxy/privacy services
accreditation issue in preparation for the GAC session and also
in preparation for our joint session with the GNSO and the ICANN
Board.
I will quickly introduce members of the Public Safety Working
Group who are actually the subject matter experts, and I will
start perhaps with Wanawit at the end, who is my co-chair.
Introduce yourself, please.

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

Good morning.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

CATHRIN BAUER-BULST:

EN

Good morning, Cathrin Bauer-Bulst from the European
Commission.

GREGORY MOUNIER:

Good morning.

I'm Gregory Mounier from the European

Cybercrime Center at EUROPOL.

LAUREEN KAPIN:

Laureen Kapin from the U.S. Federal Trade Commission.

BOBBY FLAIM:

And Bobby Flaim from the FBI.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. And I'm Alice Munyua, chair of the Public Safety
Working Group, from the African Union Commission.
So we're going straight to the first update that's looking on the
next generation gTLD registration directory services.
GAC liaison has been EUROPOL, Greg Mounier, so I'll hand over
the microphone to you, Greg.

Page 2 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

GREGORY MOUNIER:

EN

Thank you, Alice. For those who were not there yesterday for the
PDP RDS cross-community session, just a very quick update on
where we are at.
The reform of the WHOIS and this PDP is a long story, of course.
ICANN and various working groups have been working on it a
long time, so a lot of work has been done already.
We had -- The working group has spent -- have spent the last
three months mapping out all the key inputs on that topic, and
now we are in the second phase where we are identifying out of
those key inputs all the possible requirements that next
generation RDS could have.
We haven't started any deliberation yet on those requirements.
Yesterday we had that public session where all attendees could
met with new requirements, just to give you an idea. We have
now a document about 110 pages with about 750 different
requirements that the next generation RDS could have. And so
at the end of this ICANN meeting, we will start dividing those
requirements in groups and then another task that the
leadership of the PDP next generation RDS has now is to try to
find a compromise on a way to decide and to define consensus
on those requirements. They're working on the working method
of how we're going to discuss about those requirements and
how are we going to decide on which requirements are relevant

Page 3 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

or not. And then once we have done that work, that will be by
the end of 2016, there will be a first report that will be an initial
report that will be presented to the community. So that's where
we are at. It's a long-term endeavor but for the Public Safety
Working Group this is very important to be sure that the GAC and
the Public Safety Working Group views are represented in this
PDP.
And, yeah, I will keep you informed regularly.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Greg. Any questions or comments?
Switzerland.

SWITZERLAND:

Hello, good morning, and thank you very much for this update.
Just a very quick question. Do you see any need for GAC input
on this moment of time?
Thank you.

GREGORY MOUNIER:

Yes, absolutely.

That's important.

The working group has

already issued a second informal request on possible
requirements that are not already on the list. And so we are

Page 4 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

working now on -- at the -- me and the commission and the
Public Safety Working Group on trying to commit with new
requirements that might be suitable for the GAC. And the plan is
to send is to send you in July a draft list of requirements that are
not in the initial list, and then for you to endorse it or not and
then potentially by the end of July we'll submit it to the full
working group.
But the way the working group is working is that they want to
issue a number of outreach requests, sometimes formal,
sometimes inform ma'am. There's no obligation to respond.
And sometimes the deadlines are fairly short and this one was
issued mid-June and we had more or less informally to come
back to them by today. So it's very short. So for the GAC
structure, it's -- you know, we told them and had discussion with
the leadership team of the Public Safety Working Group that we
are engaged. We want to contribute, but we'll probably need a
bit more flexibility in terms of the time we'll have to get back to
them. But that's okay, I think.

ALICE MUNYUA:

And just to be clear, I sent an email just before we came to
Helsinki, I think last week, just warning GAC colleagues to expect
this second informal outreach request. And I did let you know
that we've informed the working group that it's going to be near

Page 5 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

impossible to have the GAC comments on time and to receive a
response for them to say it's okay, they would expect a GAC
response by the end of July.
This is an informal request. Most of the documents already exist
so basically all we're going to be doing is providing a list of
documents that already exist from the GAC. But we do have to
come pack to the GAC for the usual, you know, process of
endorsement and additional comments.
Any more comments?
Okay. If there are no other comments, I think I'll hand over the
mic to Bobby Flaim to give us an update on the previous GAC
advice on the Registrar Accreditation Agreement. Bobby.

BOBBY FLAIM:

Okay. Thank you, Alice.
One of the things that we're aiming to do is have some follow-up
to GAC advice which has yet to be implemented. There's three
areas. The number one area concerns the WHOIS specification
of the 2013 RAA. More specifically, and the WHOIS specification
is the cross-validation of the address. That was something that
should have been implemented within about six months of the
RAA being signed back in January of 2014.

Page 6 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

So we've been following it over the years, but this is something
that I think we want the GAC to formally look at and make a
request for concerning the implementation.
So I think what we envision at this point is discussing this here or
at least mentioning this, and then actually drafting a document
maybe with very specific questions.
And more particularly, with the GAC advice session yesterday,
conforming what we do write with what was discussed
yesterday, I believe by Manal, insofar as the implementation,
what the vision is, the rationale, so on, so forth.
Some of the things with the cross-validation that we're going to
ask about is what has been done so far by ICANN to fulfill this
recommendation. Is there a timeline with specific milestones,
things of that nature.
So that is something that we would like to maybe have the GAC
look into a little bit more.
Another thing that we are looking into pursuant to GAC advice
from Beijing on the new gTLDs, specifically the six general
safeguards, one of the things was providing statistics on abuse
such as phishing and malware. So we're going to see where we
are with that and make a request from ICANN insofar as if there's
being any statistics provided.

Page 7 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

I know we had a session yesterday with the registrars, registries,
Bruce Tonkin from the Board had called the session yesterday,
and one of the things that the ICANN security department said
that within a few days they would start to release some
statistics. So that is something that we would like to follow and
look into; again, pursuant to Beijing GAC advice concerning the
new gTLDs.
So these are some of the things. I think there may be other areas
as well, but these are the two big things that we are looking for
to kind of follow the advice that the GAC has given previously to
see what the status is; if it hasn't been implemented, when can
we look for that implementation; how will it be implemented, so
on and so forth.
So there may be a few other things but like I said at the
beginning, what we do plan on doing as the PSWG is writing a
document and going to the GAC for review and endorsement
and then bringing it to ICANN.
So that's all I had for myself.
I do also have Mason Cole here. I guess we can go to questions
first, but I do want to give Mason Cole the opportunity to give us
an update on the Healthy Domains Initiative.

Page 8 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

Mason, if you know, is the GNSO representative to the GAC, and
he also is the chair of the Healthy Domains Initiative. So I had
asked him to be here to give us an update on that. The PSWG
sits in on that and we look to be a partner in that. Any way we
can foster good behavior, good practices, security and stability,
we always want to be a part of.
So Mason has done that through Healthy Domains Initiative. At
the last meeting in Marrakech, they had a meeting. This meeting
being different, there's no meeting, but there is constant
movement on that initiative.
So, Alice, do you want to -- If there's any questions, should I take
them and give it to Mason or what do you think is best?

ALICE MUNYUA:

We can have questions on the Registrar Accreditation Agreement
first and any follow-up.
Any questions?
Iran, please. Thank you.

IRAN:

Thank you. Good morning. Once the statistics of abuses of
safety are identified and available, what follow-up action is
required? Does it have any impact on the advice itself, or what is

Page 9 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

the actions?

Just providing the statistics is just what has

happened. What will be the follow-up actions?
Thank you.

BOBBY FLAIM:

I think what we want is first to have the transparency to actually
get a vision of what's going on. And then take appropriate steps
from there to see if there's any contractual obligations, to see if
there's any enforcement mechanisms at that point.
But I think what we're trying to do at this point maybe is shed
some sunshine on the issue, see where things are going right
and things where things may not be going right, and to see how
we would work as a community to correct some problems.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Okay. There are no other questions, so, Mason, please.

MASON COLE:

Thank you, Alice.

Good morning, everyone.

As Bobby

mentioned, my name is Mason Cole. Some of you know me as
the GNSO liaison to the GAC, which I'm pleased to continue
serving in that role. I also chair the Healthy Domains Initiative
committee, which is under the umbrella of the Domain Name
Association.

Page 10 of 45

The Domain Name Association is the trade

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

organization for registries and registrars that represent those
bodies' interests in various form.
Bobby asked me to give a brief update on the Healthy Domains
Initiative, which I'm pleased to do. I'll do so quickly and if
anyone has any questions I'm happy to answer them now or
later on in the day, whatever is convenient.
So let me just give you a quick overview of the purpose of the
Healthy Domains Initiative. There are three objectives. One is to
establish a network of industry partners that communicate and
collaborate with one another in order to present a healthier and
continually evolving domain name space.
The second is to identify or develop industry accepted best
practices that registries and registrars can employ in a way to
promote standards for healthy domains.
And the third objective, then, is to demonstrate to the
community contracted parties' desire to implement those
practices and otherwise fulfill the stewardship obligations we
have to the domain name space.
So the Healthy Domains Initiative started about a year ago, and
in the process of developing the initiative, we collected lots of
feedback from registries, registrars, and other parties who have
an interest in the domain name space.

Page 11 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

We held a summit in Seattle in February of this year where we
had 77 participants, and we collected lots of ideas about how to
promote a healthy domain name space, both operationally and
otherwise representing what a healthy domain name space
would look like.
As Bobby mentioned, we met again in Marrakech and we
synthesized those ideas down to a few that we thought we could
reasonably implement in a productive way, and that -- excuse
me, that's evolving into a best practices document which we're
now refining as the first output of the Healthy Domains Initiative.
So as Bobby mentioned, I'm here to give you a brief update on
what that -- what the status is of that best practices document
and what you might expect in terms of the next steps.
So the document then is organized into -- oh, I'm sorry, there's
one other thing I want to mention. We conducted a survey of
registries and registrars to ascertain what they already are
employing in terms of operational best practices that promote a
healthy domain name space. These are things like -- and we
wanted to find out what contracted parties are already doing.
And we found that in a pleasing way there were lots of things
that were already underway. Things like monitoring for phishing
and malware, pre-registration validation for certain high
security TLDs, publication of easy ways to report abuse

Page 12 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

complaints, tools for automating abuse complaints, things of
this nature.
So with that as a baseline then, we wanted to find out where we
want to go. So we've categorized the best practices into three
areas. The first is operational best practices that could be
immediately recommended. And there are maybe a dozen of
those, and these are things such as making sure there's a priority
focus on proactive recognition and action on abuse, you know,
maintaining an environment among all parties that's quickly
able to react to best practices and principles. Abuse reporting
requirements that are clear and documented to end users and to
contracted parties. And I'm happy to share some other ideas
with you as well, but I'm conscious of our time.
Our next category then is aspirational best practices. And by
aspirational I mean these are things that are not currently in
place but can be put into place over time. And we have -- some
of these are operationally complex and they'll need to be
implemented over time, but they include things such as making
sure that there's a timely response to domain name takedown
requests by various authorities or law enforcement. And I know
that contracted parties are interested in enhancing their
relationship with law enforcement for various reasons, but this
is one of them that can be productively put to use.

Page 13 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

Another is sharing information among contracted parties as
we're able to do so legally about fraudulent domain name
registration. That includes things like credit card information,
company names and other available data such as that. We're
thinking of collaborating with child abuse authorities as a way to
combat online child abuse, establishing a reporting system for
what's known as badware which is software that disregards
user's choices about how their computers are used. These are
examples of aspirational practices that we would like to employ
over time.
And then the third category then is additional practices that
would be ideas for future consideration. These are things such
as third-party validators which would be a validator that has
expertise, credibility to evaluate complaints, and then form a
trusted relationship between that party and registries and
registrars so that abuse can be handled in an expedited way.
Another example would be the trusted notifier program. You
might have read that there are registries in the industry who
have recently established relationships with experts in content
and they have established ways that those trusted notifiers can
let a registry or registrar know about clear and pervasive uses of
copyright infringement and then there's a process for taking
down those domain names or otherwise mitigating that abuse.

Page 14 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

So in terms of next steps then, we're here in Helsinki. There will
be a brief meeting tomorrow of the contracted parties for the
healthy domains initiative. We're going to review these ideas,
refine them further, and then the next idea or the next step
would be to assign subgroups to develop the concepts and then
find out how to put them into operational practice with
registries and registrars.

We'll probably also plan another

summit sometime in 2017 where all interested parties, not just
registries and registrars but anyone with a stake in a healthy
domain name environment, can gather and talk about how to
further put some of these practices into place.
So I realize this is a very short update. There's plenty more in
here. So I encourage questions, and I'm happy to answer them
as I'm able.

MASON COLE:

Thank you, Bobby. Alice.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Mason. Any questions or comments? Yes, Council of
Europe.

Page 15 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

COUNCIL OF EUROPE:

EN

Thank you very much, Madam President. Just a quick comment
to -- yeah. Gianluca Esposito from the Council of Europe. I just
wanted to thank very much the speaker for the presentation and
I was particularly watching the reference to these aspirational
practices that he described on preventing child abuse. That's an
area where recently our membership has been really focusing on
working not just to take down content of course but also to deal
with the issue of domain names that explicitly advertise child
abuse and child pornography material. So I just wanted to
welcome that development.

I think that's actually a very

welcomed step. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. Ah, yes, Thailand.

THAILAND:

Yes. Wanawit, for the record. Mason, thank you. And I have
some question regarding the trusted notifier because you have
mentioned about the registry and registrar coordinations. And if
we -- and that might be related to the issues that are dealing
with this, IPs and that kind of content, but when it come to this
kind of hate speech or things that led to the platform provider,
will the trust notifier includes in that scopes of discussion as well
with this? Thank you.

Page 16 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

MASON COLE:

EN

Thank you for the question. At present, no, the trusted notifier
program does not include hate speech. It's specifically devoted
to copyright infringement. So contracted parties want to be
careful to also protect free speech rights and balance that out
with dealing with clear and pervasive infringement of copyright.
Hate speech may be an area that we address. It's not currently
on the agenda. But I appreciate that, and I'm happy to bring it
up with the committee.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. Oh, yes, U.K., please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Good morning. My name is Nick. I'm from the U.K. Mason,
thank you very much for coming along. A quick question on a
sort of slightly divergent topic. As part of your best practice
within the HDI, are you also looking at best practice deployment
of protocols that can facilitate security, things like DNSSEC and
DMARC? Is that feature in as part of this study or likely to feature
as part of future additional studies?

Page 17 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

MASON COLE:

EN

Thank you, Nick, for the question. We have looked at DNSSEC
and other security issues. Those are -- some of those issues are
already, as you know, baked into operations with registries and
registrars, so it's not an operational focus of HDI. But we do
consult with security authorities to make sure that anything
relevant to security is represented by best practice ideas. So I'm
happy to take that concept forward as well. And I thank you for
the input.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. If there are no other questions, I think we'll spend
the next half hour discussing quite an important issue for the
GAC, privacy/proxy accreditation issues. I think this has been a
sensitive topic for the GAC and for the public service working
group, especially taking into consideration there's a final report
that's supposed to be considered by the board. The GAC has a
few concerns that were presented to the working group prior to
finalization of the final report that was submitted to the -- to the
board. So this -- we decided to take this opportunity to start
discussing some of the concerns that were raised by several GAC
members regarding some of the issues. In preparation for the
two sessions we have, one that's going to be a GAC-only session
starting at 11:00 to 11:30, and the objective of this session is
going to be looking at those questions again, discussing them
with the GAC members, and discussing the various approaches

Page 18 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

by the PSWG and identifying some of the questions. And we are
also going to try and come -- and come up with ways of
approaching the joint session. But for now, I think I will let
Laureen Kapin and Cathrin from the European Commission to
present on -- on the issues. And we can have a discussion in
preparation for the next session. So Laureen, please.

LAUREEN KAPIN:

Good morning. So this is Laureen Kapin from the Federal Trade
Commission wearing my public safety working group hat. For
context, what I briefly want to do is give a little bit of
background and then identify the key issues that we hope to
focus on.
So I think as a preliminary statement, what I want to make clear
is that the public safety working group welcomes the work of the
privacy/proxy services accreditation issues PDP because it
establishes a framework for accreditation of privacy/proxy
service providers where none existed before, and there are
many, many positive, positive developments contained in the
recommendations of the working group. And the fact that we
have some concerns should not take away from the overall very
positive impact of the working group and their efforts to really
grapple with a lot of difficult questions.

Page 19 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

That said, I want to lay a little bit of foundational information for
the discussion. The working group came out with an initial
report and in response to that initial report the public safety
working

group

submitted

some

comments

that

were

subsequently approved by the GAC that set forth some concerns.
By the time of the final report there was a final result by the
working group that in some places did not accept some of the
concerns that were expressed by the GAC-endorsed public safety
working group comments.

And the comments in the first

instance reflected some public policy concerns. And so now
we're here at the point where -- where these recommendations
are before the board to be accepted and now is really the -- the
moment where if the GAC has concerns that they want to be
addressed, now is the time to set forth those concerns as advice.
And the real issue is what would be the best way to handle those
concerns.
So what are the concerns specifically? Within the GAC we had an
excellent briefing document prepared on this issue that's
labeled privacy/proxy services

accreditation issues, not

surprisingly, and it's agenda item nine. If folks haven't already
looked at it, I would commend them to look at it because it gives
a great summary of all the background and the issues. But
specifically there were three issues that were identified as
raising public policy concerns. The first one deals with the

Page 20 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

confidentiality of law enforcement requests for information.
When law enforcement or consumer protection authorities are
engaging in investigations of criminal conduct, deceptive
conduct, they may seek information regarding who is behind a
domain name.

And in order for those investigations to go

forward, it's quite important that those requests not be
conveyed, relayed, revealed, disclosed to the very target of the
information. So that is -- is quite important. Because if the
target of your information knows that you as a law enforcement
authority are looking at them, that may have lots of negative
impacts for your investigation. Evidence may be destroyed, and
that could be the least harmful consequence.
Money can disappear. People can get harmed. There can be
very significant consequences. And that is something that was
not made a requirement in the final recommendations.
Now, on sort of a way-forward path, there is a protocol that is
contained in the working group report on an analogous issue
that deals with how information in the I.P. context may be
handled. And there's a specific protocol for when investigations
regarding infringement are going to be handled. So certainly
there is a model in place that can be looked to and serve as an
analogy for how law enforcement requests can be treated as
well. And so this may be something that can be dealt with
during implementation phase of the privacy/proxy services

Page 21 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

accreditation issues' recommendations. There could be work
done to develop a protocol to deal with law enforcement
requests as well and to keep them confidential. So, that is the
first topic.
Second, there's the issue of how law enforcement is defined
jurisdictionally. And right now, as it stands, the working group
suggests that to the extent the law requires, there could be an
obligation to respond to law enforcement requests within the
service provider's own jurisdiction.
The issue there, the challenge there is that we live in a world
where our frauds, where our criminal behavior doesn't just take
place within the confines of one jurisdiction. Often there are
frauds and deceptions and criminal behavior that is taking place
all over the world. You may have a bad actor in one jurisdiction
who

is

sending

money

to

another

jurisdiction

and

communicating with associates in four different jurisdictions.
And you may have law enforcement and consumer protection
authorities who are also operating in many jurisdictions,
sometimes cooperatively, to deal with these issues.
So if you have a scenario or a protocol where the service
provider is only obligated to deal with the law enforcement in
their own jurisdiction, that can effectively hobble the ability of
law enforcement to act collectively, effectively to deal with

Page 22 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

criminal or deceptive behavior. So that would be the second
issue that we see, that that raises some problems for effective
consumer protection and law enforcement action.
And then, finally, we have our third issue which deals with the
question -- the somewhat many-differences-of-opinion question
of whether privacy/proxy services should be permitted for
domains that collect money for goods or services. And the GACendorsed public safety working group recommendations had
advocated that public -- privacy/proxy services should not be
allowed in that context.
And the rationale is that when the public provides their sensitive
financial information like a credit card or a bank account
number, the public has a right to know who they are doing
business with.

And the entity or individual behind those

domains should not be permitted to be anonymous, to hide
their identities behind a privacy or proxy services provider.
And that was an issue that was the subject of much debate and
reflection by the working group. Indeed, in the initial report,
there was no consensus on this issue. And in the final report,
there was a decision that there would not be a distinction
between entities that are engaged in commercial services and
entities that weren't; that everyone would be permitted to use

Page 23 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

these privacy/proxy services. So that is inconsistent with the
GAC-endorsed public safety working group recommendations.
And, again, the issue on the table is what would be the way
forward because as I started -- and I'm now coming full circle -there are many, many positive developments in the working
group recommendations. And I think our work here is to try and
find a path forward to balance the public policy concerns of the
GAC and figure out a path forward for the good work that has
been done by the PDP working group to go forward and figure
out is there a way to handle this that balances these interests.
And I also want to turn the microphone over to my colleague
Catherin to amplify on these issues as well.

CATHRIN BAUER-BULST:

Thank you, Laureen.
I think you have given a very comprehensive overview of the
issues. Let me just add two points. First of all, while the three
issues that Laureen has raised in this public safety working
group would recommend to the GAC to further discuss are key
from a public safety perspective, they are in their nature -- they
do not necessitate a reopening of the process of the policy
development

but

rather

could

be

addressed

in

the

implementation of the GNSO recommendations. So we think

Page 24 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

that this is an important point. It's not going back on the
process that has already taken place but, rather, can be
addressed during the implementation of that process.
And, secondly, they do not -- and I think Laureen has already
raised this point also. They do not call into question the really
excellent service to privacy that the proxy/privacy services
provide.

So the general principle of affording the greatest

possible privacy to the users who wish to not have any public
information in the WHOIS is not called into question by these
recommendations.

Rather,

we're

calling

for

specific

modifications to address the concerns of law enforcement for
the purposes of individual investigations in criminal cases.
But now I'll turn it over to Alice because I think there will be a lot
of discussion on this also. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Catherin and Laureen. There was a question -several questions, Switzerland and others who asked whether
the PPSAI PDP, the GNSO working group, what rationale they
provided in not taking into consideration GAC advice.
Perhaps we can put that slide up. I think it's titled "The rationale
provided by" -- Julia -- so that everyone is able to see it. Perhaps
I can start talking about it while that is coming up.

Page 25 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

So, it says that the privacy/proxy service providers are not
required to keep law enforcement agent requests confidential.
According to them, this reflected comments they've received,
over 1,000 comments they've received from the community. The
working group, again, did not develop a disclosure framework
due to authorization and confidentiality issues. That was the
rationale provided.
And, also, we tend to think there was a lack of law enforcement
agent expertise within, perhaps, the working group.
Then the issue of definition, which I think Catherin and Laureen
has touched on. And we tend to think if the law enforcement
agent definition in the 2013 RAA is revised, then the definition of
the accreditation agreement would also have to be revised. And
we know that this could take a while. And perhaps that's not
what the PSWG is recommending at the moment. So I think we
accept that rationale.
They also mentioned that they thoroughly considered the policy
decisions to allow the use of commercial domain transactions to
continue. And what this stressed specifically is, again, the issue
of definition of "commercial activity" and "online financial
transaction." And, again, mentioning that opinion reflected a
large majority of the public comments, specifically focusing on

Page 26 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

the privacy risks and the need to protect small businesses and to
enable political speech.
Those are some of the rationale that were provided by the PDP
working group for those GAC members who requested.
Perhaps I want to encourage a little bit of discussion here before
we go to the next session. So any -- anyone with questions or
additional comments, this is the time. Thank you.
Yes, Council of Europe.

COUNCIL OF EUROPE:

Yes, thank you very much.

Peter Kimpian from Council of

Europe. I'm representing the Data Protection Committee of the
Council of Europe. Just a quick reaction -- though I'm not a
member of this working group, however, those topics are quite
familiar also to us -- to share our views on that.
On confidentiality, I think it's less problematic than it seems for
the first time because if we -- if we are referring to data
protection regulation all over the world -- and currently we have
108 countries which are applying data protection regulation -basically in all this regulation, there is an exemption for law
enforcement to notify the data subject when it may bring a
negative effect on investigation and so on and so forth.

Page 27 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

So I would recommend maybe to have reference to privacy -privacy acts and privacy and data protection international
legislation which allows this kind of confidentiality if it's
founded and if it's well-based.
The second issue, as we also experience, it's a bit more
problematic. We come across to the same problem. The cloud
evidence group, which is a group set within the framework of
Council of Europe in dealing with the implementation of the
Budapest Convention, the convention on cybercrime, and the
sharing evidence between law enforcement authority.
Here I would like to bring your attention to make also reference
to, again, international legal instruments and national ones
because there is the Budapest Convention which allows to a
certain extent that kind of sharing of evidence between law
enforcement authority.
But, for example, to give you a very basic example that if a
French authority -- law enforcement authority would like to have
some evidence from a Finnish service provider under European
law, it would be impossible. So before -- and I know in other
jurisdictions, this problem exists.
What we are encouraging in our -- in the framework of Budapest
Convention is to have a better and a smoother cooperation
within law enforcement but is within law enforcement players to

Page 28 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

share information by using existing tools among each other. So
these are the reflections I have and I wanted to share with you at
this stage. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. Any other comments? Yes, Indonesia and then
Spain.

INDONESIA:

Thank you. Just curious to know more about the scope of the
PDP working group studies. Do you also include public personal
data that was submitted to the operators? And what if the law
enforcement agencies would like to get that kind of
information?
For example, I mean, Google Maps, for example. My mobile,
when I buy it, there's already Google Map inside. I just activate it
when I want. And the operator certainly knows where I am,
where I'm located at the particular time.
Does the law enforcement agencies have the access to that more
or less public information data like that? Because by doing -- by
getting this data, the Google operator, for example, can even
know whether I'm moving very fast or slow and whether that
road is red or is -- what you call it -- jammed or not, you know,
things like that.

Page 29 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

How can the LEA, like my friend Bob, can have access to that, for
example?
And of course others. That also applies to others, you see.
At least we have now high-resolution satellites that can see my
house. We have many others. We have stratosphere-based apps
being discussed now in the ITU, and tomorrow it will fly above
my house and see whether I'm taking a bath or not.
[ Laughter ]

INDONESIA:

So I just want to -- curious to know, this will -- this will happen in
three or four years' time, and I would like to know that
stratosphere-based access that will be located in -- you know,
above my home. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Bobby?

BOBBY FLAIM:

Hello, my good friend. No, I think what we're talking about here
is totally separate. This is just proxy/privacy services for domain
names, so this is the very strict and limited scope that we're
talking about. When you're registering a domain name, whether
you want that information to be public or private, and if you

Page 30 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

want it to be private or proxied, you know, you would pay the
additional fees that would hide your information.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Spain, please.

SPAIN:

Thank you and good morning. I have three points to make.
As regards the confidentiality requirements, I would like to
support what my colleague from the Council of Europe has
stated. At least in European jurisdictions, data protection laws
provides for an exception to the consent of the data holder to -for authorities and prosecutors and public administrations to
demand data from third parties without having to get prior
consent from the individual.
And the reason why I think is the individual will have an
opportunity to see all the evidence gathered and to say
something in -- to defend himself later in the process, so he
won't be defenseless.
The only thing we try to avoid is that person destroying evidence
and all of that.
My second point concerns one of the rationales given by the
working group for not disclosing data, for not -- for not

Page 31 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

prohibiting commercial activities from using privacy services.
They say, "Well, if courts require the data, we will hand them
over."
I would like to recall that in some national legal traditions like
the ones in France and Spain and other countries,
administrative authorities have authority to pursue public -public policies and to enforce laws. This is especially in the area
of consumer protection.

Consumer fraud and consumer

protection are mostly dealt with by administrative authorities,
not courts, and they have all the powers to enforce legislation.
So when we say "courts" here, we should be aware that some
public authorities couldn't have the chance to have recourse to
courts because their national legal traditions don't provide for
that.
And my third point is to recall that the GAC engaged early in the
work of the working group. The GAC provided comments at an
earlier stage and they haven't been taken into account by the
working group. They have provided rationale, but in the end the
result is that they were not taken into account.
So there is a chance that in the implementation phase, they are
turned down again.

Page 32 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

For that reason, I think that if the GAC is going to provide that
kind of advice to tackle GAC recommendations in the
implementation phase, there should be incentive for the GNSO,
or whoever is working in the implementation phase, to really
take them seriously now, and for that reason I think what has
been specified in the draft advice for GAC is good, is fair to tell
the board, "You should order or kind of give an order to the
implementers to take this seriously and find a way to
accommodate those recommendations." And if they are not
incorporated in the implementation phase, then the relevant
recommendations, the ones that relate to these, have to go back
to the board.
Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much, Spain.
I have the U.K. and then Canada. U.K., please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you, Alice.
A couple of points.
I'd like to sort of welcome the comments that Laureen made
earlier. We don't want to hold this thing up. We also recognize

Page 33 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

that it's important to get the accreditation in this area. I was
interested by Cathrin's comment about some kind of review
during the implementation phase of these recommendations.
Has there been any sort of further consideration of what form
such review might take, and have we received any informal
feedback from members of the GNSO to that idea or have the
GNSO -- this is one for Mason -- have the GNSO also sort of
considered how they might collaborate with the GAC in such a
review?
Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, U.K.

If you'll notice, one -- the advice we've

proposed here is for some of the GAC considerations and
concerns to be taken into consideration during the review, but
I'll let Mason speak to the issue on whether or not the GNSO has
considered how they may approach some of the concerns that
have already been raised by the GAC. Mason?

MASON COLE:

Thank you, Alice.
The GNSO is aware of the GAC -- of the GAC's desire to re-review
this issue. There's a meeting between the GNSO and the GAC -- I

Page 34 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

believe it's tomorrow -- where I think this is going to be
addressed. I don't think the GNSO has fully formed how it's
going to approach the GAC's ongoing desire to address this
issue, but I know it's a matter of consideration right now.

ALICE MUNYUA:

And we do have a joint session with them to discuss these issues
further.
Cathrin, you want to respond to the Council of Europe?
And then Canada.

CATHRIN BAUER-BULST:

Yes. Thank you, Alice.
Just to avoid misunderstandings, first of all, I fully support what
Gema already has said and what the Council of Europe has
correctly stated, that the data protection framework is no
obstacle to our first recommendation to the GAC.
And then on the second recommendation, the concept of
responding to requests not just from a law enforcement agency
that is established in the same territory as the privacy/proxy
service, I would just like to remind participants that we are
talking about two very different categories of legal frameworks
here.

Page 35 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

The one that you refer to, the Budapest Convention, is
implemented through criminal procedural laws and has an
impact on the enforceability of such requests.
What we're talking about here is to avoid that in a protocol, such
requests are already excluded in the protocol to the
implementation of a contract.
So such requests, as you're probably aware, are already being
made for all other sorts of information that can be provided on a
voluntary basis, and I'm speaking from the perspective of the 28
E.U. member states here, where -- to the -- to the understanding
that we have on the basis of the transparency reports of major
providers, such requests are being made on a voluntary basis for
all sorts of evidence such as subscriber information and the
question then is whether or not those requests are enforceable
through authoritative means.
So really, we are talking about two different categories here and
I want to be very clear that there is no legal obstacle, per se, to
the recommendation that we are making on the procedural
implementation of contractual arrangements. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Page 36 of 45

Thank you, Cathrin.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

Canada and then Switzerland. Then I'm afraid we'll have to
close.
Canada, please.

CANADA:

Thank you very much, Alice.

And thank you, Laureen and

Cathrin, for your presentation.
We certainly recognize that law enforcement needs to have
access to effective mechanisms in place to obtain lawful access
to WHOIS information, and we also appreciate how important
accurate and reliable WHOIS information is to fluid ongoing
investigations.
The work on privacy and proxy accreditation services received
an unprecedented amount of interest, with over 10,000
comments being filed, and the final report is the conclusion of a
rigorous multistakeholder discussion over a two-year period on
a complex and multifaceted issue. It was informed by a diversity
of perspectives, including privacy, small and medium-size
businesses, intellectual property, law enforcement, and
consumer protection, and I think there is a sense of urgency here
in allowing this work to move forward.
We understand that specific -- we understand that there is a
specification in the registrar accreditation agreement that deals

Page 37 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

with the collection of WHOIS information and that this is set to
expire in January of next year, and the work undertaken wasn't
done to serve as the basis for replacing this specification.
However, this is contingent on it being implemented.
So in light of these various considerations, Canada supports the
report moving forward. We agree, certainly, that if -- if there is
an opportunity to address the most pressing concerns of the
GAC public safety working group, we should explore this during
implementation, provided that, as Cathrin has mentioned and
as the U.K. has also mentioned, that it builds on and does not
undo the work to date.
However, we would not want this to serve as grounds for the
GAC public safety working group to sort of indefinitely hold the
report until we're satisfied with the implementation.
Thank you very much.

ALICE MUNYUA:

We have Switzerland and then there's a remote participant.
Switzerland, please.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you very much, Alice.
I think that the --

Page 38 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

Well, first of all, thank you for the very good brief with -- in its
final form with the rationales. I think that gives a very good
overview about the history of the question.
I just want to secure clarification because I've heard some
expressions which perhaps might be not completely consistent,
or I'm not sure whether I've understood everything well,
because in presenting the issues, there was mention that some
of the recommendations are inconsistent with GAC advice and
then as -- on the possibilities of finding a compromise in the
implementation, there was a mention that there might be
difficulties or more difficulties in some of the issues.
So what I would like to know is whether you have more
information, especially on the side of ICANN, ICANN staff, or the
GNSO people who might be in the implementation review -implementation team, whether they -- what's their assessment
on how our recommendations might be reconciled during the
implementation phase with their recommendations.
So that's, I think, very important in order to be sure that we are
going down that path of focusing on reconciling everything in
the implementation, but only if that's feasible, to a certain
extent, because if there's no willingness to really reconcile that,
we would end up with an implementation work which is
inconsistent with our recommendations and this would be

Page 39 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

counterproductive to the common understanding that we want
this work to move forward as fast as possible.
So -- And related to this, I've seen in the draft advice that we
would be recommending the Board that the GAC and the Public
Safety Working Group is consulted, but I wonder whether we
even could recommend them, suggest them that somebody
from the Public Safety Working Group -- and I know this is more
work -- is included in that review team because that would
smooth things a lot.
Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much. And just to respond to Canada and the
concerns, the Public Safety Working Group is not in any way
advising that we hold up the process of the Board considering
the final report. I think what we want to consider during the
joint session to respond to the question from Switzerland, we
have a joint session with the GNSO and the ICANN Board to
discuss the way forward and how some of the GAC concerns
could be addressed during the implementation phase. Whether
or not and how they can be addressed.

Page 40 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

Now, I have the U.S., United States, and then Australia, and then
I think Mary Wong. And then I do think we need to look at the
GAC advice of the PSWG to see if we are okay with it.
So United States first.

UNITED STATES:

Yes, thank you very much. I just wanted to concur with the
comments that were made previously by our Canadian
colleagues as well as some comments made by our Swiss
colleague in that I think there's so much positive coming out of
what the PDP has recommended already, it would really be a
shame to in any way hold up that kind of progress.
So when it comes to, I think, having a constructive dialogue with
the GNSO to the extent possible of trying to find ways to address
the outstanding concerns to implementation is a great way
forward.

The concept of somehow sending back any

recommendations, and my interpretation of that is that could
somehow

potentially

hold

up

the

approval

of

the

recommendations. I see as an alternative to that having a
continued dialogue with the GNSO to perhaps, in the future, if
there's opportunities to enhance the accreditation process for
privacy/proxy services, that's a more, I think, productive,
constructive avenue moving forward.

Page 41 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, United States.
Australia.

AUSTRALIA:

Thank you, Chair. I'll be very brief.
I see tomorrow we have another Public Safety Working Group
session that is a closed meeting. I just wanted to make the
general observation that GAC working group -- or the other GAC
working groups are all open. All GAC sessions are open, and
even our communique drafting sessions are now open to other
members of the community. And just as a general principle, I
think the Public Safety Working Group meetings should be open
as well.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Well noted. Thank you.
Yes. Remote, please.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you, Alice. I just wanted to note in response to Jorge's
comment about whether the recommendations from the GAC

Page 42 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

EN

and the PPSAI working group were consistent or inconsistent;
that out of the three issues, issue areas, there's one for which
the GAC advice is inconsistent with the recommendations of the
working group, and, therefore, that one could not be
implemented as the GAC recommended. So there would need to
be work-around.
So this issue is the -- is the issue of whether or not commercial
providers providing financial services can or cannot use privacy
and proxy services. So there could -- They started to discuss
possible ways to address, rather than to address the underlying
issues that the GAC has, which is that these providers could be
hiding criminals and not responding to law enforcement
requests. So by developing a de-accreditation system for those
providers.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, Julia. I think we may want to consider -- if we could
put up the slide on GAC advice, proposed GAC advice, so we
could consider that as a....
Okay. As you can see, the Public Safety Working Group has
proposed language here that will probably need to be
considered. The first one being I think what Julia has mentioned
here, the possibility of....

Page 43 of 45

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

Yes, we have very little time.
The idea of framework, the framework for law enforcement,
continue dialogue, as has been mentioned by quite a number of
colleagues. And then the possibility of exploring how some of
the

GAC

concerns

could

be

addressed

during

the

implementation review, and feedback sought out as the
implementation process continues.
So some of these other recommendations, I'm sure we'll have
time to discuss this during the communique drafting session.
We now have to go to the next session, and I think -- I would like
to close this and hand over to the GAC chair to take us through
the next session.
Thank you, everybody.

Thank you very much for the very

constructive discussions.

OLOF NORDLING:

And this is Olof Nordling. ICANN staff, in support of the GAC.
And I would like to remind those of you at the table who are not
GAC member representatives or GAC observers to please give
priority to the GAC member representative so they have access
to the mics for the upcoming plenary session which is due to
start in a few minutes.

Page 44 of 45

HELSINKI – GAC Public Safety Working Group Meeting

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 45 of 45

EN

