HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 15:15 to 16:45 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

Ladies and gentlemen, if you would take your seats with your
beverages, if you don't mind.
I probably don't need to use the microphone, but it helps the
people in the back corner who are welcome to step outside and
continue their private conversations. Indeed, you may get up
and leave at any time, but please pay attention to the topic we
are dealing with here in this afternoon's cross-community
forum.
Today's thrill-packed and exciting adventure, and I will continue
at this level until I don't have to be the schoolmarm speaking
over the chattering people, is on country and other geographic
names.
And I'm now sending in the big guns. This may not be pretty,
ladies and gentlemen. Bart is on his way to clear the hallways.
I have sent the hall monitor out.
Right-oh. In a slightly calmer, now, state, as only the last of the
stragglers are taking to their seats and getting themselves in the
Zen moment of this afternoon, I hope you're all relaxed, I hope

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

you're all caffeinated, and I hope you all don't mind the fact that
we've called you to order relatively close to time.
We do realize that there's been a little administrivia hiccup
where there's still a number of the publication, the forwardfacing screens and things, saying that this meeting is in the
Helsinki Hall. We've made sure that there's a sign down in the
Helsinki Hall to have anybody who has got lost down wherever
that is to come back up here. But at this point, we don't want to
run too much later because we have got a lot of time this
afternoon for you to interact with each other and to interact
with us.
And this afternoon is all about hearing your voice, especially if
you are not a voice that we regularly hear on these matters.
We are not interested -- Am I engaging you closely enough, Iran - to hear what we have heard before and again and again.
Exactly. We are very, very, very keen to hear from not the usual
suspects.
So let's get this ball rolling and let's get the first slide. I know
there's a clicker or some magic happens, but let's have our next
slide, shall we?
And we have a drum roll, hoping somebody is making the magic
happen.

Page 2 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

Do I look like a patient person?
If I had a clicker, I would operate the clicker. All right.
While they're getting the next bit clicked over in our Adobe
Connect presentation, I want to tell you a little bit -- there we go
-- slight different to how we're going to be running this
afternoon.
As you've seen in the last two afternoons, you have our
wonderful staff -- an example there, Bernadette, number 2 -with a sign that says a number, with a microphone. You each
have a sector. There are today four sectors, and if you have been
in these rooms before you know how that works. You get their
attention. They make sure you get the microphone. We make
sure you get heard.
But look to my left and to my right. Are there some handsome
gentlemen there? I believe so. I have a number 5 and a number
6, and later on I will be auctioning them if they are game. No, I
won't. I promise not to. Well, we thought we might, but we've
decided not to.
And what Peter and Jonathan are going to do is act as your
moderators.

And they're going to be roving moderators.

They're going to make sure that new voices are heard and
they're going to make sure that we also have a good time this

Page 3 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

afternoon, because this is serious stuff, but that doesn't mean
we can't have a smile and a bit of a giggle on the way through.
Quick background to the forum. This is just to frame what is
going on right now and what is already ensconced in our system.
There is a wide range of country and other geographic name
related policies, processes and discussions within ICANN. Many
of you will know that. Some of you may not. But here is a list.
New gTLD Applicant Guidebook, specifically section 2.2.4.
RFC 1591, dear to so many of our hearts, especially if you have
done the Framework of Interpretation work, which use -- it
specifies the use of ISO 3166-1 for the country codes.
Specification 5 of the Registry Agreement. IDN ccTLD policy and
fast track, the 2007 GAC principles regarding new gTLDs, and the
2007 GNSO final report on the introduction of new gTLDs.
Let's not stop there. What's happening now, looking at this
topic? The GAC working group on the geographic names, the
Cross-Community Working Group on Use of Country and
Territory Names as TLDs, and the GNSO PDP on Subsequent
Procedures in New gTLDs. And I'm exhausted just saying it.
This is kind of complicated and there's a lot going on, and all the
work that is going on is worthy and good. But what we're going

Page 4 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

to do now, if I can have the next slide, is have a discussion and
see if we can, at the end of today, answer this question.
Let's have a sharing of information. Let's have a sharing of
opinion. Let's hear each other's voice, but see if we can come up
with an outcome that gives us some guidance in the following.
In the light of all these parallel activities, is it feasible to develop
a harmonized framework on the use of country and other
geographic names in the DNS?
And to that end, the poll, if you are logged into the Adobe
Connect room, and I would like to think that many of you will do
this, log into the Adobe Connect room and there is a poll with a
short version of that question, and in a moment we'll be able to
say yes, no, or maybe. On my screen it says the poll is closed,
which is disappointing because I was planning on keeping the
poll open for the whole of the session. But what we're hoping is
if you are a maybe right now, you may be a no or a yes because
you'll have crystallized your decision at the end.
That is enough from me. I'm just going to help the trains run in
the right direction. And I'm now going to hand over to which of
you wonderful gentlemen to start off with. That will be number
6, Jonathan.

Page 5 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

Thank you very much, Cheryl. Is my microphone active? Great.
So good to be with you all, and thanks for a very dynamic
introduction, Cheryl. I know many of you, and I hope many of
you know me. I participate in this -- in ICANN through the
Registry

Stakeholder

Group,

through

my

professional

relationship with Afilias, but here I've been asked to be involved
as a moderator and as a facilitator to try and help get the
conversation going around the various subjects.
Effectively on the sort of GNSO side, you will hear from Peter
here in a moment. So we have a GNSO and a ccNSO person. It's
clear you have an overarching question which you have been
asked and you will be well familiar -- or some of you will be
particularly familiar with the different areas of activity and how
broadly they cross. We'd really like to get a sense from you and
get active participation. And as Cheryl said, the poll in a sense is
a fun way but it's also a way of testing the temperature of the
room and feeling.
So in the light of current circumstances, this poll is not a
question of whether you would like to walk away and exit from
the whole question. It's actually a poll about how you might feel
about things, how things are actually going.
So, Peter, over to you and then we'll pick it up.

Page 6 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

PETER VERGOTE:

EN

Okay. Thank you very much, Jonathan.
Good afternoon, everybody. My name is Peter Vergote. I'm
working for .BE registry, DNS Belgium. So as Jonathan has
stated, I'm more clinging towards the ccNSO side. However, our
registry is a bit of a strange beast because we're also running
two new gTLDs. So we have a bit of experience in both camps.
Like Jonathan said, neither he, neither me, we are not the
experts when it comes down to deal with issues like country and
geographic names. That's to your advantage.
We are in the absolutely neutral zone and our goal of today is to
get as much interaction with each of you as possibly can be.
Because there is no yes or no or there is no right or wrong
answer at the end of the session. But the people from the CrossCommunity Working Group would like to know a sense, a
temperature of the room or even some new view so that I can
use this as building blocks to proceed with their work.
So in order to kick off this session, I would go back to you,
Jonathan, and have you fire the first question at the audience.

Page 7 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

I don't know if I'm going to quite fire it at you. I think we can
start off from where we are, actually. And it would be very good
to get some sense.
Many of you will be working in some of the areas. Many of you
will be impacted by some of the points. It would be very useful
to hear and understand your views on the feasibility.
Do you think it is feasible? Should -- Is this something we should
be trying to do?

And if so, have you got any concrete

suggestions about harmonizing this so that, across those
different areas where we -- where geographic terms impact the
different parts of the work of the community, is it possible, is it
reasonable, and what are the ideas to make that feasible?
And I think number 3 is already keen to talk.

CLARK LACKERT:

Yes, hello.

I'm Clark Lackert.

I'm working within the

Geographical Indications Committee of the INTA, and I'm a chair
of one of the subcommittees.
I think it would be very helpful if we got the latest comments
from the GAC on the draft that was circulated in 2014 in London.
And, in fact, I rose at that meeting to make a comment about
international law.

Page 8 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

What we need is after numerous written comments were made
in 2014, and if we want to move this harmonize sayings forward,
I think it would be helpful for us to see where is the GAC at the
moment, make the drafts available to the community, and then
we can provide our input. And I think that will be helpful in
moving ahead in harmonization.
Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Okay; thanks. That's reasonable to hear, but what we don't
want to do is get entrenched in existing positions of advocacy.
If it's helpful to the conversation to hear quickly, if someone is
willing and able to do so, great. If not, I'd bring you back to this
question about other mechanisms to make things feasible.
That's one way of taking a step in that direction. Let's hear if
someone is willing to elucidate as briefly as possible the current
status within the GAC.

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

Two.

INDONESIA:

Thank you. My name is Ashwin from Indonesia.

Page 9 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

Just share comments about use of names of a country and
geographical names.
I think this was -- this is -- this varies from time to time and from
place to place. When .ASIA was introduced a few years ago, I
don't think there was a problem. But a few years ago when
.AFRICA was trying to be introduced, and you have a problem. I
was having a joke with my colleagues. If .ASIA is re-introduced
today, what will happen? Should there be a conflict or not?
When a software called Java is used, everybody in Java say, "Oh,
our island is becoming more, more, more popular!" But if you
are not (indiscernible) the Java, perhaps not everybody is
happy.
So these are the kinds of things that the question of names of
country and those geographic names from time to time and
place to place.
Moreover, it will be also affected by the -- what you call it? The
other names. For example, if we are using indonesia.id, .ID for
.id.google or .id.twitter, whatever, perhaps people will be happy
with that. But if we are using .id.d, perhaps Indonesian people
are not happy with that.
So it may change from time to time. I'm not saying that I'm fully
correct. I mean, I have to check with, you know, with all the

Page 10 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

people, but at least this is my personal view that this is a
function of so many aspect. And that's the reason why we in the
GAC, we always want that this kind of names related to the
country will be consulted with the GAC from that particular
country.
Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Yeah. So these are very good current examples. And for .ASIA
yesterday might be .EUROPE tomorrow. And then, of course,
how does that impact on .EU. These are good questions, and the
GAC might well want to be able to have the opportunity to have
a position, but the question is how do we produce some form or
is it feasible and is it reasonable to produce some sort of
reliable, predictable framework? Because the challenge is we've
got multiple and potentially conflicting frameworks, multiple
and potentially conflicting pieces of activity and an environment
in which it's not -- I mean, I think what many of us -- Certainly if I
talk from a business point of view, one would want a reliable,
predictable framework within which to work, and I'm not sure
we have that right now, and I expect many of us would
appreciate that.
So let's hear.

Page 11 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

Go ahead 2.

EDMON CHUNG:

Hello, this Edmon Chung. Sorry, I'm kind of a usual suspect, but
I wanted to respond immediately because .ASIA was brought up
and I think it's quite relevant to the discussion.
When .ASIA was introduced, actually we did go through a
process to engage the GAC at that time. It wasn't as rigorous or,
you know, in this particular round, but that was one of the
reasons -- I guess one of the experiences that created in this
round how we deal with some of these names. But I think going
forward, there probably needs to be further framework on this.
And here the question -- I'm not quite sure you're talking about - I guess you're talking about TLD, but it seems to also be talking
about second-level domains as well or not? I just want to clarify
on that. And the -- the topic of country names and the topic of
geographic names may be quite different. You know, country
names are much more confined defined set whereas geographic
names, even city names or even mountain names or river names
became -- become geographic names, and that seems to require
a very different set of rules to think about. So just those couple
of points.

Page 12 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

Thanks, Edmon. And I put you on a mental clock, so if you had
gone any more than about another 60 seconds I would have said
too much for a usual suspect but that was perfect.
Just to answer your question on the TLDs, I think you've made
some observations which may have helped others think about
what they want to say next, we're specifically talking top level.
Okay?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Number 1, please.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Number 1.

ELISE LINDEBERG:

Thank you. Is it on? Okay. Thank you. My name is Elise
Lindeberg. I'm from the Norwegian government in the GAC. On
the feasibility to develop harmonized framework was the key
question, as was said, on geographical names in the DNS, we -we have seen all different documents and processes in regard to
the geographical names that you have listed. And for the GAC I
think the current -- current situation on the -- on the top level is
that we are having diverging views as it is now and that we are

Page 13 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

still working on the -- a process to develop final GAC advice on
that. So we haven't concluded. But speaking on behalf of
Norway, not on the GAC, we see that we have an Applicant
Guidebook from the first round. It's been a product of a giveand-take of a long, long, long discussion between the whole
community and the different sources that was put on the list.
And so the -- we think that the current status of the Applicant
Guidebook is a central question for where we go from now. Are
we going to change it? Is it so that we change all of it? Do we -- if
we can't agree is the current status in the Applicant Guidebook
the one that we have to relate to? So I think this is a key
question for the further discussion. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you. Do we have another -- yep, 5.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay. Thank you. I think -- I think this is a very important point
and it triggers something that I would like to throw into the
audience is the question what we already have in terms of the
Applicant Guidebook. Is that -- because this has been the result
of enormous, tremendous, debate, is this something that we
should use as a starting point and then build up from there or
see that there is no common understanding or common finding
in going any further or is the approach more, according to you,

Page 14 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

that we should say no, let's start with a white cloth on the table
and look at everything from that perspective? So I would very
much appreciate to have any feedback on that question.
Thanks.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

In the back sector, can I have some microphone to what I guess
is sector 3? Thank you. It's on its way. Okay. Ready to go. 4.

DONNA AUSTIN:

Thanks, Peter. Donna Austin. As somebody who was involved in
that discussion of what ended up in the guidebook, I think it's
useful to understand how we got to that point and I think that
history shouldn't be lost. And I think it goes to what the GAC rep
from Norway was saying. So I wouldn't like to see the history
lost because there was a lot of discussion to get to that point,
and I'd hate to see us kind of backtrack now from, you know,
where we got to. So I understand the interest in this. It's a very
sensitive topic, but we did spend probably three or four years on
it to get to that point in the guidebook in the first place. Thanks.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Page 15 of 64

Thank you, Donna. Number 5.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

PETER VERGOTE:

EN

Okay, thank you very much, Donna. Your point makes perfect
sense to me. Are there any people in the room that have a
different view or is there a commonality that this is actually
making very much sense and that what is in the current
Applicant Guidebook is a very excellent starting point and
should not be redone or questions. Any reactions, please?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

All right. Let me help you here. Put up your hand if you think we
stick with the Applicant Guidebook as she is writ right now?

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Well, just if I could say, Cheryl, it's not necessarily Applicant
Guidebook. It's Applicant Guidebook on this topic. Effectively
making it a baseline from which we work because Ashwin
pointed out that things move on over time and we need a
baseline to work from or do we throw the book out and start
again.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Forgive my shorthand, Jonathan. That's why you're here to look
after the G space. Well done. Let's try that again. Jonathan, you
restate the question so we'll have it.

Page 16 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

Can we take the Applicant Guidebook as a baseline from which
we work, especially given the context in which it was presented,
that that was developed through a multistakeholder process
and with a great deal of work, is that a reasonable basis from
which to work?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Don't have to speak to it. Just put your hand up if you think it is
the case. This is a yes -- yes or no. We're just getting an idea.
Okay. Gives us an idea. Thank you. Should we ask about the no
vote, Jonathan?

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Sure.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

If you don't think it's a good idea, one person over here who
doesn't think it's a good idea.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Why not?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Yes. Here we go. The microphone is yours. Number 1.

Page 17 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

EN

From the Applicant Guidebook you -- the reference of
geographical names is referred to 3166 which there are certain
problem on translation or Romanizations for the non-ASCII. And
if you refer to the United Nation group of expert on geographical
names, it might be difference translations happen there. And I
used to follow up this issue, in fact, ICANN used to visit UNGEGN
and ask about this, and from what I remember in ccTLD fast
tracks that UNGEGN was referenced to -- as the reference to the
geo terms.

And I just wondered in the current Applicant

Guidebook is not the reference to the UNGEGN so that's why I
say no.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Okay. So that's an interesting point. So it may be satisfactory as
a baseline in Roman script, but -- in ASCII, but once you go into
non-ASCII it starts to weaken as a baseline. But that still gives us
a potential baseline.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Number 4.

JAAP AKKERHUIS:

Want to make a clarification as a member of the 3166
(indiscernible).
names.

Page 18 of 64

The whole 3166 is not about geographical

It just happens that there are some names with

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

(indiscernible) areas but this is -- and if I remember the
guidebook properly, it's only used as one of the sources of
geographical names. So please don't put any magical powers
into the use of 3166. Let's not confuse the matter there.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

We promise not to make any magic with 3166. I promise, Jaap.

PETER VERGOTE:

Thank you for that point of order.
suggestion from the room.

I just got a very good

If you're speaking on the

microphone, please always state your name and your affiliation.
Thank you.
So while I'm at it, I have been hearing from governments and
from the gTLD namespace, I would say, that I'm looking for my
own home ground. I want to hear from the CC -- from the
ccTLDs. Is this more neutral to us as a ccTLD or do we have any
strong opinions on the matter? CCs, speak up, please.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Would you like to clarify.

GRIGORI SAGHYAN:

Thank you, Grigori Saghyan, .AM ccTLD. So I think the problem is
a very -- very complex. It's impossible to resolve. And I vote that

Page 19 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

it is impossible to have harmonized framework. I was member -I was a member of this study group for ccNSO for geographical
names and a member of working group on geographical names.
There was a survey which was provided -- organized by a study
group.

There was a lot of questions which were sent to

governments through UNESCO. Study group have collected lot
of information, and at that time I understand that it's impossible
to have harmonized network.
So I think the right way is to find a way to work around.
My suggestion is -- I have sent my suggestion to the working
group -- to have a -- in order to don't have any confuse -confusion of user, we can use the same -- same strategy as we
use when we use HTPS.

Everybody see that it is secure

connection because it's green. In case of countries, I think it will
be possible to add in the browsers for country names a flag or -- I
don't know, flag of the country or to have a bold or to underline
that it's a country code. Everybody will understand that it's a
country code. And if it is GNSO -- gTLD, we will have situation as
we have today. Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Okay. But there you're talking about -- sorry, Peter. There
you're talking about to the right of the dot identifying somehow
in the browser whether it's a gTLD or ccTLD. And you started off

Page 20 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

by saying you thought it wasn't feasible. I just looked at the poll,
and the poll is indicating that around 80% of you think it is
feasible to have -- or may be feasible to have some kind of
harmonized framework. So I think it would be very good as well
to hear, in addition to the simple hands-up indication, to give
some reasons why so it starts to put a bit of substance onto that
over and above the point about the Applicant Guidebook.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay. You stole a bit of my question, Jonathan, because I was
going to ask well, this looks like a very interesting point of view
to have it in the browser. How is that technical feasible, if it's
technical feasible at all. I don't know whether we have any
technical experts in the room that can shed some light on this.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

(off microphone). Microphone 4.

JAAP AKKERHUIS:

Well, I will point out that domain names are not only used in
browsers. They are used in numerous places. Sometimes you
don't see them. And then also browsers are used to -- by people
who cannot see but hear. And, you know, it's kind of -- to be
honest, it's a non-starter.

Page 21 of 64

I mean, you -- there is no such thing

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

in protocol which tells you what the color is of the domain, it's
just a string. So it's technical impossible.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay, thank you, Jaap.

That was a pretty straightforward

answer to the question. As Jonathan mentioned, the results of
the poll -- this is, however, a remarkable result that we have,
such a clear preference for the ones that think that we can
actually come to a harmonized framework.
What I would like to do is to see what's the temperature in the
room and is it different, what we have on the poll.
So could any one of you who thinks that it's possible or that it
may be possible to come to a harmonized framework, could you
please raise your hand, please. Was my question not clear?
[ Laughter ]

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Maybe not.

PETER VERGOTE:

So the poll says currently that about 80% -- I have understood
that right, haven't I, Jonathan?

Page 22 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

(off microphone).
To be accurate, 53% of you say yes. 17% of you say maybe. So
in combination, that looks more like 70% are thinking it may be
or is possible to have a harmonized framework on the poll.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay. Thank you. So on average we have 70/30. So who of you
thinks that it is possible or it may be possible to come to a
harmonized framework? Please raise your hand.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

No penalty to raising it or not, but it does help frame -- give us an
idea. Your voting at the moment, are you? Okay.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay. There was a question or an observation there.

SUSAN PAYNE:

Yeah, Susan Payne for the record. I suspect there may be some
confusion from people about what they are being asked.
There's a question written: With all these parallel activities, is it
feasible to have a harmonized framework? My answer to that
would be no.

Page 23 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

But when the question is being asked in the room it is: Do
people think it is possible to come to a harmonized framework?
Well, maybe yes but I would still say no, not if there are activities
happening in three or four different places.
Do we not think it's a problem that we may have three or four
different groups coming to different conclusions? How can we
reach a harmonized framework by acting like that?

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Thank you, Susan. That's very helpful because, as you point out,
knowing what you are trying to ask is very different to reading
what the question says.
And really the concern is there's a bunch of parallel activities.
There's a lot going on in different places, and there are also
established rules and procedures.
Is it feasible -- not with all these parallel. Is it feasible to either
terminate these parallel processes and start again or to do
something else, some other form of activity that makes it -- that
will give us a practical, feasible outcome to a harmonized
framework?
And we've had -- one suggestion is yes, and base that on the
applicant guidebook as a starting point.

Page 24 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

So reactions, points, and thoughts about whether it is possible
to have a harmonized framework and, if so, how we go about
that. And raise your hand if you want to speak, and the roving
mics will come to you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

We have Number 2.

ORNULF STORM:

Yes, hello. This is Ornulf Storm from Norway in the GAC. Just a
quick comment on this question. I think the question is possibly
phrased too complicated because as our previous comment that
my colleague made, that we already have a framework for the
use of country and geographic names in the DNS, which is
actually the applicant guidebook.
So I think the question would be to -- how to develop that
framework. Or I think some might want to have -- that if it's not
available for use, it is not a framework for them to be used. But
a framework that also have some protection mechanisms is also
a framework. So something that's -- maybe you have to phrase
the question differently. Thank you.

Page 25 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

And that's a good point. And so should we be carrying on
activities on broadly the same point, the geographic names
point, in multiple different areas?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

3.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Excuse me. The question is not appropriately raised, not your
question.

We should start:

Should we take coordinated

activities with a view to arrive as some degree of harmonized
work? The most important, this parallel is not efficient, is not
productive. We mention today in somewhat earlier. We should
have the coordinated activities. Put all our efforts together in
the coordinated, harmonized activities with a view to arrive at
some degree of harmonization with the action. That is the
question that we have to raise. Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

And do you have an opinion as to the answer? Do you have an
opinion on the answer?

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

In my view, it is, yes, we should do that and we would arrive at
some degree of harmony.

Page 26 of 64

We cannot arrive at absolute

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

harmonization. Impossible. Cultural diversity, religion diversity,
policy diversity would not allow us to have a fully harmonized
thing. But we should and we could arrive at some degree of
harmonization, yes.

But we should activation -- actively

coordinate activities together. Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Seems to be support for coordinated activity, which by
definition potentially means scrapping the other existing
activity. So that's important. And it seems that there may be
still some limits but the advocacy is to at least give it a try.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

1.

NICK WOOD:

Yes, thank you. Nick Wood. I agree with Iran. Isn't the process
the policy development process? Isn't that how we should be
doing this?

PETER VERGOTE:

I think with the last couple of answers that we have that this
debate is really going into a kind of acceleration. So it actually
brings us more to the question, and I don't know whether we
would have a straw poll on that or not. But it's a tempting idea.

Page 27 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

The question is evolving in: Should we as soon as possible really
stop with as much parallel activity that there is ongoing there
and look for one single new working group or study group or
whatever we want to call it to tackle with this and to address it
and to be ready for a future gTLD round.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

To the extent that they're future gTLD rounds, I mean, this is
GNSO policy. The applicant guidebook was GNSO policy. There
was advocacy earlier for that as a baseline. So really in a sense,
what's -- what I think is being proposed is GNSO policy with the
applicant guidebook as a starting point to work from.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Annebeth, please.

ANNEBETH LANGE:

Thank you, Annebeth Lange from .NO. I just wanted to say a few
things about what's happened before because I've been here for
17 years now working with a lot of this stuff, first from the
governmental side and been working with geographical names
for years and years.

Page 28 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

The last process we had, that ended in the applicant guidebook.
It was a long, long process, five years -- about five years from the
beginning. And until we had a compromise in that 2.2.4.
And it was give and take. Some government and some others
wanted more protection, and some others on the other side
wanted no protection. But this is a compromise that we ended
up with after a long, hard work. And that was a PDP from the
GNSO with input from the other stakeholders.
So in many ways, I see that should we throw that -- all that
overboard and start again? It had worked quite well. And as
long as we don't agree on any other solution, we have
something that we have already agreed on, even if we didn't get
everything we wanted, all of us.
So let's not ruin what we have already achieved. If we can kind
of make it even better, good. But in many ways, after all these
years, I see so many different views here, it's difficult. And we
shouldn't start to quarrel again. Let's keep on the good work
and start with this we already have and perhaps find it even
better, if it's possible. Thank you.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay. Thank you very much, Annebeth. That was a clear point,
a clear vision from your side.

Page 29 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

Is there -- according to you, is there any way how we can
combine a number of things? Have some of the work that has
been going on, have it saved as a kind of reference and, in the
meantime, try to stop with the parallel tracks as soon as
possible? Would that -- according to you, could that be a way
forward?

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Why is there parallel activity going on? If, indeed, we have a
multistakeholder developed, satisfactory broadly solution in the
applicant guidebook, why is there additional work going on on
the subject?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

I have got Number 2 and then Number 5 and we will give you the
microphone back so you can answer that question. Four, I
meant to say 4.

ROBERTO GAETANO:

Yes. Roberto Gaetano. I think that -- I agree with the latest
comment from Norway, from.NO. Let's do with what we have.
I think that we cannot think of getting a perfect solution here.
And there's the risk of losing more and more time on something
that is without a solution. And I tell you my opinion on why this

Page 30 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

is a problem without -- without a solution that can be good for
everybody.
We seem to be unable to make the distinction between a string
and content. We are fighting on the -- a string that is just a word
or whatever. And I think that this becomes important only when
content is associated to that string.
That means when we have, for instance, a Web site that is
addressed with that particular string. But we have no clue on
what the -- whoever is applying for a domain name that has
some geographic connotation is going to use with that string. It
may be perfectly legitimate or acceptable, and it can be
absolutely unacceptable. But we are unable to make this sort of
distinction the moment that the string is assigned.
On the other hand, we cannot imagine a sort of a police that
does preventive action on this. Maybe -- maybe the UDRP is the
only solution to this and to see what is going to happen with that
Web site or the other use of the name and to see if it's legitimate
or not.
But to have this prior decision, I think it's very difficult to make.
So we are going to every -- every different party that is making
this discussion is going to make assumption on how the string is
going to be used. And, therefore, we are talking sometimes

Page 31 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

about completely different things.

EN

And it is not -- not

reasonable.
On the other hand, we need to have a common rule. So my
personal opinion is let's get as fast as possible to a common rule
that everybody will have to follow so that there's no
misinterpretation. And whether the rule at the end is going to be
more or less fair, it becomes, by and large, irrelevant because
then people will adopt to that rule. But important thing is not to
leave the applicants in the uncertainty. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you. We will go back to Number 4 and then back to you
Number 2, Annebeth.

JEFF NEUMAN:

This is Jeff Neuman. I just wanted to -- I'm one of the co-chairs
of the subsequent procedures working group. I don't want to
offer my opinion on this subject, but I just -- I came up when I
heard one of the latest speakers say that what's in the applicant
guidebook was subject to the last PDP, and that's actually not
correct.
The -- What's in the guidebook now on geographic names came
out of a compromise that was from -- between the GAC and the
ICANN board that came out of discussions in 2010, I believe, in

Page 32 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

Brussels, when there were consultations that were held. The -actually, what came out of the GNSO was at the top level there
should be no protection of geographic names from the policy
development process, and that was not -- there were no
reserved strings.
So I just didn't want to leave the -- the perception that this came
out -- the current rule came out of a PDP. I'm not saying whether
I agree or disagree, but I just want it clear that what's in the
guidebook actually came out of a compromise between the
ICANN board and the GAC, out of those discussions in 2010,
which I believe were in Brussels I think was the -- the
intersessional meeting. Thanks.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

That you, Jeff.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Did it in some way -- I mean, I think it would be very useful to
hear if that in some way was insufficient or it let us down in the
current round because clearly this is about how we go forward
and were there shortcomings with that and is there -- you know,

Page 33 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

what are the weaknesses and why is there other work going on if
this is sufficient?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

And while you're thinking about -- Cheryl Langdon-Orr, for the
record -- the response to Jonathan's question, we must let
Annebeth respond to a specific question from Peter, so...

ANNEBETH LANGE:

Annebeth Lange again.
Well, both to Peter and actually also to Jeff, I agree, Peter, that
it's ended up in an applicant guidebook after a lot of discussion
but it started with a PDP, and at that time we were not as good
as we are now to cooperate in the beginning.
So when we got the first edition, a lot of people, a lot of
stakeholders found things there that they couldn't agree on, so
it was much more discussion than -- that it had to be.
So then it -- in my view, it still ended up as a compromise from
non-protection at all to some protection but less than the GAC
wanted in the first place, so it was in between.
And then you asked why is it three different groups working with
this now, if it's sufficient with the PDP, and I think it all started
with what Jeff just said, that it was -- the compromise was only

Page 34 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

for the first round, so GAC achieved this protection for the first
round and it was then an understanding that it should be
worked on this further on, so that was why the study group
started first, and when they gave the final report, it was
established a cross-community working group to try to find, and
that was only for first-level country and territory names from ISO
3166, what's in 2.2.4 today.
And then the GAC started to discuss other geographical names
because they were not satisfied with the protection that had
been given, because it was not protected at all in the guidebook
that we have today.
So in my personal view, I think that that is a step too far the
other way because it's very difficult to protect everything in
geographical -- geographical names.
Where should we draw the line?
But on the other hand, we have some kind of compromise that
protects some of the top of the hierarchy that can be a way
between, in a way.
But then we have to give some better solution for other
geographical names through a dispute resolution, consultation
period, other models, to find a way to make it sufficiently safe

Page 35 of 64

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

for the government that it's not go- -- we don't have the problem
that we had other geographical names last round. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

If I can take 4 before I go back to 5, and then you might want to
draw out your question again.

ALEXANDER SCHUBERT:

Hello. My name is Alexander Schubert. I am a cofounder of a
geo TLD. It was .BERLIN. We started with that in 2005. And
there was a similar discussion back then and it was hard to
convince everyone that we could even apply for .BERLIN.
So I wanted to support Jeff and I want to read just one sentence
from the applicant guidebook.
It says, "Applications for strings that are country or territory
names will not be approved as they are not available under the
new gTLD program in this applicant round."

And it says

specifically "in this applicant round."
So it kind of leads to the question: Doesn't that imply that a
change was anticipated back then?
So when we say we shouldn't lose the history of the applicant
guidebook, that is the history. It says "in this round."

Page 36 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

And the other short thing that I wanted to say, whatever will be
decided, I would assume in the end if someone goes for a city
name, country name, or the like, there will be government
approval -- or there should be government approval, in fact -and that is quite some protection.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Peter?

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay.

Thank you.

I just want -- having heard the latest

interventions, I just would like to reverse our thinking patterns a
bit.
As I see it, we have been approaching it from the angle what has
been going on in the past, what is currently going on, and what
would we need to go further.
Now, the latest speakers have clearly indicated that there could
be one major obstacle that we are facing. We want to avoid
legal uncertainty for applicants in future gTLD rounds.
Now, is it feasible, according to you, to use that as a leverage to
do some back-planning?
That might give us a realistic view how wide the timespan is to
either continue with what we're doing now, either to say, "Okay,

Page 37 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

within this time frame we are not going to get it," or to say,
"Well, it's time to drastically change. Let's start with something
that could be the current wording in the applicant guidebook
concerning the use of country and geographic names and let's
take it from there."
I would like to hear from you: Would that be an interesting way
to look at things, to do it from -- from a back-planning side?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you, Peter.

And while we're talking -- while you're

working out what you're going to say to that, Number 2.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Thank you. Let us take a realistic, pragmatic, and efficient
approach. It is a great mistake if we throw away whatever we
have done during the years and years and years. I don't think
that any strategy in the world say that start a revolutionary
actions and put away everything and start from zero and come
back to the same point.
So what we have to do, disband all these parallel working
groups, number one.

Establish a new working group with

involvement of everybody, a multistakeholder approach like
CCWG and so on and so forth. Three, take the guidebook as a
starting

Page 38 of 64

point,

identify

areas

of

problems,

difficulties,

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

shortcomings, et patati et patata. Take all the activities has
been done by different groups up to now as background
information and supporting material and use them, if necessary
and appropriate, and then try to have a draft and work on that.
I am sure that we arrive at some degree of harmonization but
not absolute harmonization. Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Thank you very much. So that's a really interesting point. I
mean, the first -- the first sort of assertion is that we disband
current activity. The second is that we come together under
some form of new umbrella to do this.
Now, I would pose, a counterquestion to that is: In a sense, as
others have talked about, this is gTLD policy. gTLD policy comes
through the GNSO, with participation from whoever else might
like to participate in.
So the question is: Why should this not be done as gTLD policy,
and to the extent that there is already gTLD policy going on, is
this being dealt with under the new gTLD subsequent
procedures work or some other form of gTLD policy?
So let's hear -- because Kavouss makes an interesting
suggestion. First of all, throw out the existing parallel work
because they clearly are going in parallel and potentially in

Page 39 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

conflict. Second, come together under some framework. He
posited that we go with a cross-community working group.
That's reasonable in one sense, because it's constructive and it's
holistic and it goes forward. But we are dealing with new gTLD
policy here, so that causes us an issue. Thoughts or responses to
that, please.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

And we have two people for Microphone 2 and then we'll be
going to Number 4.

ANDERS HEKTOR:

Okay.

My name is Anders Hektor.

I'm the Swedish

representative for Sweden.
I'm tempted to ask, "What do you have in mind," but I won't do
that.
But it's -- you're asking us to throw away the silos that we're
working with to embark on something that we're not familiar
with and that we don't know what it would be.
Speaking only for the GAC, we need to have some certainty
within our community before starting to engage with other
communities. We need to know what we can agree on in the

Page 40 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

GAC, so we sort of need this activity, this parallel activity that we
have.
Is it possible to put that question on hold if -- whether or not we
can drop the parallel activities and talk about what alternative
there would be? Because you're asking us to leave what we
have and think about what could be, so perhaps we can turn it
around. Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

That's interesting and useful. So my understanding is that the
alternatives would be either GNSO policy development or crosscommunity working group work.

Those seem to be two

reasonable alternatives on the table which may or may not be
sufficient.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Number 2 and then Number 4.

THOMAS De HAAN:

Yes.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

Page 41 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

THOMAS De HAAN:

EN

Oh, sorry. Thomas De Haan, for the record, from the Dutch GAC
rep. Just a couple of comments.
I just wanted to say something about what Peter said about
back-planning. I think this is quite dangerous because it puts
everybody in a kind of time limit and I think this is important
enough to deal with before you even launch a second round, but
that's my remark on Peter.
The other point is about how this work could be, let's say,
carried out in a PDP.

I think that the CCWG experience

demonstrates that we can work out things which affect many,
many stakeholders in ICANN within a cross-community working
setting, so I think that would be -And I think the third thing is that I would just come back to
Roberto Gaetano's remark that we should also very much, let's
say, incorporate the notion that a UDRP on these kind of things
could also be worked out in parallel. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Page 42 of 64

Number 4.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JEFF NEUMAN:

EN

Thanks. This is Jeff Neuman again, and this is not -- I'm just
offering this as my own opinion, but I do think that this would fit
in within the GNSO PDP on subsequent procedures.
I also think that -- just to let everyone know, the procedures that
we've adopted as far as how the group operates is very much
modeled after the CCWG, so that should give some comfort that
it is allowing groups to provide input and we very much follow
the good work that the CCWG has done.
And I also think that, you know, one of the dangers of the
proposal that was mentioned, not by the last speaker but by the
speaker before that, was that if you form your own group within
the GAC and you form your position, and only then go into the -either a cross-community group or the PDP, the problem with
that is you become too entrenched in your own position and you
spend all of your time advocating for your own position rather
than coming into a group and allowing yourself to have your
position changed due to the conversations and discussions and
it becomes harder to compromise or come up with a consensusbased solution.
So I do think it's -- that the work should go on now and the work
-- and I would not be in favor, necessarily, of having each group
determine what its position is beforehand and then going in,

Page 43 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

because then it just becomes a -- to use a -- it becomes almost a
boxing match, and that's not what we want.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

What I'm hearing is a sort of sense of feasibility, but three
possible mechanisms are being talked about here.
One is integration within a GNSO PDP; one is a proposal that
there could be a CCWG to deal with this; and one is to let the GAC
do its work before either of those other two and sort of complete
it.
That's what I think I'm hearing. If you would like to speak to
either of those, by all means, do. If you think I've got it wrong,
let me know.

But there are some hands up and some

microphones.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

We have quite a list happening. I have two in Number -- wait. I
have a Number 2, a Number 2, a Number 4, and a Number 3.

YOUNG-EUM LEE:

Yes. Thank you. Shall I stand up?
This is Young-Eum Lee from .KR. I would actually like to express
my support for what Annebeth has said before with regard to
trying -- I mean, starting with what we have.

Page 44 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

My previous experience with -- and I mean, I'm sure most of you
have experienced this -- with the first round as well as the recent
work on the cross-community working group on the names of
countries and territories, first a study group and then the
working group, tells -- I mean shows that there is a very sharp
distinction between the opinions of the CCs and the GAC and the
opinions of the Gs.
And in a way, I do agree that having the GNSO start their PDP is -does make sense because I guess the GNSO is more -- more -we'll have more energy in doing that and will move it up much -move it forward much faster.
But then, because of the sharp differences, I don't think that just
going with the GNSO PDP is -- is the -- is something that the CCs
and the GAC could agree on, and so I mean I -- I mean, my
opinion is that there should be a -- some kind of crosscommunity working group of all the -- I mean, all the SOs and
ACs and -- or the related parties in a multistakeholder style.
And although Jeff has said that the GNSO working group is a
very multistakeholder start, but it will -- I don't think it will be
able to incorporate the very sharp differences in opinion of the
CCs and the GAC.

Page 45 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

We have another Number 2 now. Then we go to 4. Then we
come back to 3.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Thank you. I think we have an experience, a good experience
and a bitter experience. CCWG, we know how it's run. 80% of
the GNSO. 80%. We don't want to be dominated by a particular
group. Let us work together under the name CCWG with a
balance, to the extent possible, participation and remove any
sensitivity of any group.
You could put all your energies in that group. Nothing prevent
you.
So let us take something which is more practicable and does not
create any difficulty at all.
Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

And we are going to number 4 and it's going to be two speakers,
the second one very short, isn't it, Jeff, and then I'm coming over
here for number 3.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Yeah, just to -- this is Jeff Neuman. Just to quickly respond.
Again, I'm not saying whether I prefer CCWG or a PDP, but again,

Page 46 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

a PDP is meant to be -- involve the entire community. I can't
help the perception that -- that is in this room, but it is not
dominated by the G's. It is a fully inclusive group. There's a lot
of individuals in there as well. I just want to say that I do believe
a PDP can operate in the same way a CWG would be, a cross
working group.
So I want to make that very clear that we should not just throw it
out. The ALAC has been participating in the GNSO PDP since the
beginning, and I don't think you'd find too many ALAC
participants complain and say that they don't feel like their
input has been heard.
So -- And Cheryl might be able to comment on that. So I do think
the GNSO PDP.
And also, the last point I want to make is that to say that,
especially to the extent we talk about the second level, right,
because there's a difference between the top level and the
second level, and I know I'm grouping them right now together
at this point. To say that the second level is a CC issue where the
CC should be involved may or may not be accepted by everyone
in the community.
So I just want to point that out, that a lot of gTLDs -- again, just
putting on my neutral hat -- a lot of the gTLDs view this,

Page 47 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

especially at the second level, as a gTLD issue as opposed to a
ccTLD issue.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you, Jeff.
Let's stick to 4 briefly, then I've got to come back to number 3.

CONSTANTINE ROUSSOS:

Yeah, hi. This Constantine Roussos from .MUSIC.
I wanted to agree with Iran, and a lot of others who have said it's
very difficult to develop a harmonized framework just because
every country is different and you have to look at some issues,
geopolitical issues. And also, when it comes to country and
geographic names, it's true that the -- those constituents within
those groups, GAC, government, should be involved.
I'll give an extreme example. Let's say there was a policy to
allow someone to apply for a country gTLD. Let's say .CYPRESS,
for example. Someone from Turkey applies for .CYPRESS, then
you've got these political issues.
Another example is let's say someone applies. You don't know
who they are. There's a case with .BLOG. Word Press applied for
it and no one knew it was Word Press.

Page 48 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

So we've got to look at a lot of these issues in how the first round
went. And I do believe if you're talking about country codes and
geographic names, these countries should vet who is applying
for it and have some involvement. And the process should be
simple and not complex.
Thank you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

I didn't hear Iran saying -- talking against a harmonized
framework. I heard, I think, on the contrary; some suggestions
that we disband the parallel activities. And the issue is under
what mechanism we might develop it and that's what I was
hearing. Is it PDP, is it let GAC do its own work, or is it under a
CCWG type mechanism?
So just to clarify. If there is a misunderstanding, come back,
Kavouss, or anyone else. But that's what I'd heard. It wasn't so
much that it couldn't be a harmonized framework.
Let's let the conversation carry on, then.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Page 49 of 64

So we're going 3, 1, and then 4.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

NICK:

EN

Hello there. My name is Nick. I am from the U.K. government.
I'm a relative GAC baby. I've only been here for just about a year,
so I'm still learning my way through this organization, and I'm
finding out the history of these geographical name issues.
This discussion of sort of maybe -- sort of developing a single
process to address this seems interesting to me personally.
I'm just wondering. So I've seen some of the -- the tail end of the
work that's gone on in the CCWG around the accountability for
the transition, and I've seen the very tail end of the
privacy/proxy issue where recommendations went to the board
and there was GAC advice that didn't ultimately make it into the
recommendations.
Could I just ask -- Jonathan, you might be able to answer this -what's the difference between the end of the PDP process and
the end of a CCWG process where the decision is taken around,
you know, sort of what the final position is going to be that goes
to the Board?
So as far as I understand, in sort of the PDP process, you have an
initial report, goes out to public comment, refined, and then
there's some decision taken. I don't know what that is.
Would you be able to explain what that is and how that
compares to a CCWG process?

Page 50 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

EN

I'll try. I suspect there are others more expert than me on this in
the room.
It struck me earlier, we talk about, in terms of the bias of a GNSO
PDP process, in a sense, we in some ways incorrect in calling it a
GNSO PDP process because really what it is is a PDP process
applied to gTLDs. And the PDP process is meant to be inclusive.
And by calling it a GNSO PDP process, we give the impression
that it's for the GNSO, whereas really it's been developing policy
as it pertains to gTLDs.
The GNSO PDP process, as we call it, that PDP process generates
a policy which is given to the Board under a framework
governed by the bylaws and under which the Board has to
respond in certain predetermined ways. And providing due
process is followed, it essentially has to accept it or have good
reason to reject it. There's very specific criteria.
The whole CCWG framework is a relatively new and developing
framework that doesn't result in, frankly, any particular
outcome. The Board could throw it in the rubbish bin in some
sense.

It's clearly, in terms of its accountability to the

community, if the Board is satisfied that due process has been
followed, it would not be sensible for it to just throw it in the bin,
but the PDP process as it pertains to gTLD policy is very clearly

Page 51 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

governed within the ICANN bylaws and process, which is much
less so with CCWG. But nevertheless, we -- with the work we've
done on CCWGs recently, especially as we've begun to really
polish up the processes and the understanding and start to
develop a common view of other work, they're becoming much
more significant.
But that was why I made my point earlier where there was a
concern of applying CCWG processes to GNSO policy, because
they are quite, quite different.
So I hope that's helpful, Nick, and I hope that it's accurate. If
anyone --

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

A small right of reply. Very short, please.

NICK:

No, thank you. Sorry. Just a follow-up. So at the end of kind of
the CCWG process for the transition, we had the sort of situation
where the chartering organizations had to say yea or nay to that
thing, and then it was passed to the Board.
What is -- aways the final step in the GNSO PDP? I think that was
my question.

Page 52 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

Is it -- Is it like a meeting where there's a vote? Because I can
imagine a concern for governments might be that kind of that
stage, you know, if there's a government position, is it just taken
as one vote and then, you know, equal to everyone else? And
the governments might think, we're not --

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Two different points there, Nick. First of all, on the CCWG
Accountability, as I understand, the Board made a unique
commitment, a one-off commitment to be essentially bound by
that, is my understanding. But that doesn't pertain to all future
CCWGs.
With respect to the PDP process, the Board may accept or reject
that, and it is also subject to GAC advice, for which there are
unique.
So the GAC can ultimately come in, and in a sense structurally.
That's a problem we've been grappling with for a while. And in
one way, that's what we're trying to deal with now, because GAC
advice coming in late in the day or essentially having a
disruptive effect on that final outcome, which the system is
designed to do and the GAC has never foregone that ability, but
nevertheless, it is desirable from the sort of effectiveness of the
process overall that GAC is involved earlier and more thoroughly
in the process.

Page 53 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Now, just a punctuation point.

EN

We're going to run the

conversation for only another ten minutes because we want five
minutes for wrap-up and we will be finishing on time.
So I'm going to ask all of you to make your interventions as short
as practical. And we're now going to number 1.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Hello. This is Gema Campillos, GAC representative from Spain.
I'm going to be brief, but I would like to speak in Spanish, if
that's possible.
With respect to the question, I prefer to deal with it in a crossconstituency working group because I think this is kind of
symbolic. Even though policy may make reference to generic
names, the purpose of it relies on something that we,
government representatives, feel that is very close to us and is
country codes and country names.
So as you have said, you are citizens of your own country so you
should consider it that way, too. Quite sensitive for you, too.
So we feel more comfortable. And I think that I myself feel more
comfortable if all of us can work in the same environment on an

Page 54 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

equal foot, and not within a process that is led by one
organization.
So first of all, it would be a symbolic measure.
Secondly, on a legal basis, if the cross-constituency working
groups continue being held as they have been, at the very end
there should be a consensus within that cross-constituency
working group, and all of the organizations should rely on the
decisions made by that cross-constituency working group.
While the policies of the GNSO, if I am not mistaken, those that
are entitled to vote are the members of GNSO.
So I think that it would be more balanced and it would be more
in agreement with the principle of adopting consensus-based
policies in ICANN.
And thirdly, there's a practical reason.

If the process is

developed at the GNSO, there will be a GAC advice at the very
end. And so perhaps there may be a decision that is not the one
that the GNSO would have liked.

Why?

Because we

governments do not have the resources to have a PDP that is
(indiscernible) of GNSO, with mailing list of 150 emails a day, of
teleconferences once a week. So I think it's better if we go to a
cross-constituency working group.
Thank you very much.

Page 55 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

Number 4. I will then come back to number 3, and -- sorry. I've
got number 2. 2 with number 4, and 3 is the end before the
moderators do their bit.

ANDERS HEKTOR:

Thank you. Anders Hektor again, Sweden, member of the GAC,
although not speaking for the GAC, obviously. Just speaking for
Sweden at this time as well as before.
I don't want to give the impression that I think the GAC should
do its work first and then tell everybody else what it came up to.
That's not the point. On the contrary, I think the CCWG, as Iran
said, had both a sweet and sour aftertaste.
It's a good model. It's a neutral ground, so to speak. But it's also
a concern that governments sometimes had difficulties in
making their voices heard.

That's at least the way many

countries feel. So it could be an interesting model to start with.
But the terms of reference would, of course, be a very delicate
issue to decide on first. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you. I have -- I saw at least two speakers from number 4.
Go ahead.

Page 56 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

GREG SHATAN:

EN

Hi, Greg Shatan with McCarter & English and the Intellectual
Property Constituency. I think that it's, you know, obviously
very valuable to talk about what might be. But we need to
consider what is and what is the actual constitutional
framework of ICANN under the bylaws that we operate with,
which is that the policies for gTLDs are managed by the GNSO.
So the term "GNSO PDP" is -- as being identified with the
members of the GNSO is really a misnomer, as is the term "crosscommunity working group." The GNSO PDP working groups are,
in fact, cross-community. They're intended to involve all who
wish to participate. There is no favor given to those who are
members of the GNSO versus any other participant. They work
by consensus of those who participate, no matter where you
came from. As long as you're a human from the planet earth.
That seems to be the only gating factor. Apologies if anybody
does not fit.

So that is where GNSO policy is made and

developed.
Cross-community working groups are not policy development
groups.

The CCWG and the CWG are anomalies that were

established under certain circumstances due to a very specific
request that was made of ICANN. And that should not be setting
a precedent that somehow GNSO policy -- or rather I should say
gTLD policy is made anywhere else but a GNSO PDP. So that is

Page 57 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

not to say that the constitutional framework that we have is
perfect. As we've seen following it to the letter, we end up with
the GAC involved too late and coming in kind of like a second
architect into a house who decides that they don't like where the
walls are and they don't like where the windows are, and that's
never a very good setup. So we need to rethink that. And I think
that early involvement of the GAC members in the GNSO
managed PDPs to developed gTLD policy is the way things
should work because that is the way things are set out to work.
Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Sticking with 4.

MARILYN CADE:

Thank you. My name is Marilyn Cade. While I am from the
business community and my official home at ICANN is at the
business constituency, I'm not speaking as a business
constituency but as somebody who was here before ICANN
existed and who actually paid the lawyer who wrote the bylaws
for the GNSO, then called the DNSO. I want to be sure Greg is
able to listen to what I have to say. I am hearing a really
interesting point being made by several members of the GAC. I
also helped design the PDP process when I was a councilor on
the GNSO. I work, as many of you from government know,

Page 58 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

beside you or a colleague of yours in many of the U.N.
organizations where different processes exist for developing
policy.
Here at ICANN what I have seen in the last year and a half is a
great evolution to a more open interaction between all of the
different formerly vertical parts of ICANN into a more horizontal
collaborative model in the cross-community working groups.
It's not perfect just as the PDP process within the GNSO and to
be quite frank, let's be clear, it is the GNSO's PDP process. Even
if it includes other people.

I am hearing a concern being

expressed that there may be a view that another process might
be a little more equalized in the beginning. I think the most
important thing is to reach an agreement on working on this
issue and working on it together. And I think rather than saying
that the cross-community working group was a one-off
approach at the invitation of someone to solve a problem, we, as
the cross-communities, ought to look hard at the crosscommunity working group process and see if it can help us work
together in this area.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you, Marilyn. I have number 3, and I had closed the queue
with number 3. This is the last speaker from the floor. We are

Page 59 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

now wrapping up after that with our two moderators. Over to
you, number 3.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you very much. I'm Alan Greenberg from ALAC. I'm one of
the people that Jeff referred to as we participated in GNSO PDPs
forever. I have put in more hours than I could possibly calculate
into that process. I have also put in more hours than I could
possibly calculate into CCWGs. It's a good thing I can't calculate
them because I'm not sure I could justify it.
There is a -- there are some similarities in both. Both of them are
work intensive and you have to put major commitments into it.
That's really difficult for people who aren't part of the industry
and funded by it. And that's true in both. There is also a
difference. Ultimately in the PDP if you can have enough people
to get enough voices in the PDP, you may well get heard and
listened to. But the decision is ultimately made by the GNSO, in
which place the ALAC has a minimal voice and no vote. A CCWG,
if we are a chartering organization, it comes back to us and we
have to bless the output. That's a really, really big difference.
So yes, the two processes have a lot in common. They're not
necessarily bad processes, but we do have to recognize what the
differences are and how they affect the outcomes. Thank you.

Page 60 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

Thank you, Alan. And, Peter, if you can do a 90 second on where
you're feeling all of this is now, and then we'll go to Jonathan.

PETER VERGOTE:

Okay. Thank you, Cheryl. Well, I think that we have covered a lot
of ground today. I see -- I won't call it consensus, but I see a lot
of support for a solution or a traject that says well, let's have
either a PDP, either a CCWG to deal with this and to get us
forward because also I get the impression that everybody says,
well, we should not stop. We should not throw away what we
have, and we should not cease with our attempts to come to
something that is workable. So I think this is a very positive
input that we got from all the participants today.
Now, I would like to end with a bit of a bombshell. And people
don't have to answer it, but it's just something to take with you.
One of the things that according to me made a success out of the
CCWG regarding IANA and regarding the accountability, ICANN's
accountability, was time pressure.

We knew there was a

deadline. It pushed us to our very limits. If we don't have a
deadline, regardless whether we will have a PDP or a CCWG and
even in the case of a CCWG the urgency of a deadline is even
more crucial, I would say, so I think if we continue thinking in
that direction, we also certainly should figure out a way how we

Page 61 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

can come to a certain result within a certain time frame. Thank
you.

JONATHAN ROBINSON:

Thank you. So that's a very interesting point, that -- that the use
of a deadline to -- artificial or factual to create an outcome. I
picked up a number of different things. Firstly, I mean, I heard
the talk about the enhanced collaboration that's been going on.
I'm not sure -- I think it's been great in the CCWGs. I think it's a
very valuable mechanism, and I'm passionate about it and I
think we've applied some great techniques and done well. But
I've also seen enhanced collaboration, whether it's associated
with that or other activities within the PDP work. So I think the
spirit of enhanced collaboration crosses both mechanisms. I
don't think it's necessarily within one mechanism or another. So
we have the opportunity to work effectively and collaboratively
in both.
It does worry me a little that from a kind of GNSO perspective, if
you like, we are -- we seem to have confused, to some extent,
the -- the nature of the outcomes of those two groups because
they are different. One is very tightly bound, and as I said, into
the ICANN bylaws and processes and one is less so. I'm a
passionate advocate of the use of CCWGs. I think it's quite clear
that Gema particularly and Alan to some extent highlighted why

Page 62 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

CCWGs may be more inclusive or have a political dimension the
way they -- where they're more acceptable. So one way or
another we need to be cognizant of that. It certainly feels like
that's the case. But, you know, the purpose of this session was
not to be -- much as an engineer like me likes to produce
solutions -- it wasn't necessarily about producing an outcome.
I will say when you look at the poll, it's kind of interesting
because when we came into the meeting there were around 25
to 30% of you who thought a harmonized outcome wasn't
possible and the rest of you were split actually quite a strong
bias towards yes, about 50 and another 25 on maybe and 25 on
no. Where we've settled is that a few more of you have moved
into the maybe camp from both sides. So in the end we've got
around 80% yes or maybe and 20% no. So in a sense that's
encouraging. For the balance of you are thinking -- significant
balance of you are thinking something's possible. So -- and I
think -- I like Peter's bombshell.

I don't think it's that

controversial. I think having a deadline helps, but it's clear
we've got the possibility of a way forward. But I'm not going to
try and capture that. Back to you, Cheryl.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you very much. And what I'd like to do now is just ask you
to take a moment to thank most sincerely our moderators

Page 63 of 64

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Country and Other Geographic Names Forum

EN

because I think they've done a fabulous job, and you can put
your hands together for that purpose.
[ Applause ]
While you're clapping, continue to clap for the fantastic staff
that have managed all of that microphone running around the
place.
[ Applause ]
And I'm afraid they deserve a standing ovation, at least from me,
because it's hard to keep up with my Australian, the interpreting
team are just brilliant, and we would be nothing without you.
[ Applause ]
Tech guys, brilliant.

BART BOSWINKLE:

May I -- finally, finally, finally may I have a very warm thank you
for Cheryl, our chair. She's done very well.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 64 of 64

This session is now closed.

