HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management
Thursday, June 30, 2016 – 15:15 to 16:45 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The next session that will take place here is the crosscommunity session about workload issues. I'm trying to lead
that one. I would like to ask GAC members who have been
sitting in this room before to maybe free some seats or indicate
where there are free seats so that non-GAC members can also sit
around the room so that we have a mixture of -- I try to avoid
that we have the governments in the front and the rest in the
back because this is not how we should look like or sit like.
Thank you. We'll start in two minutes.
All right. Please take your seats. We are starting.
Okay. This next session is another cross-community session
about an issue that is a challenge for many people in the GAC,
but from what we hear also from other people, and I would like
those who would like to talk to do that outside and let the others
sit down and contribute to the session that we are about to
begin. Thank you very much.
Thank you. Okay. So the goal of this session is to brainstorm
about ideas to somehow make the workload at ICANN more

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

digestible and manageable for everybody who's suffering under
the workload.
So there are some elements that we could think about and
discuss, and ideas about what could be done to make this
workload problem less of a challenge.
One of these elements -- these are just -- this is just food for
thought, so I'll just throw it in and then I hope that we'll have a
discussion on whatever we come up with.
And with regard to the microphones, they are -- the
microphones that will be running around, normally they are
muted, so if you get the microphone and then the sound does
not come immediately, that doesn't mean that the microphone
is not working. So just talk and then the sound will come up. So
you don't have to hit the microphone or do things like that to
see whether it's working. They are working, but they are muted
unless the particular number will be turned on and then you will
be heard.
This is just a logistical issue.
So some of the ideas that, in consultation with others, we have
been able to come up with is questions like the following: Would
it be helpful if there was a planning with annual objectives on
certain key issues identified by the ICANN community, ideally

Page 2 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

based on the longer-term planning tools that ICANN has
developed and that are validated by the community, which is
the multiyear strategic plan, the operating plans?
So would it be useful for people to be able to prioritize and plan
their -- the distribution of their use of their resources if ICANN
would do an annual planning of things that they would like to
achieve or discussions that -- issues that they would like to have
solved in a particular year, whether it's a calendar year or fiscal
year, whatever, but to allow for people to be able to plan a little
more?
And that may help also to estimate the necessary resources that
one would think could be needed to discuss and decide on a
particular issue. And this planning -- of course if this planning
would be introduced, there would need to be feedback loops
and reporting about where we are this year, to what extent we
would have achieved the objectives of one year, to what extent
things would need to be reported to next year and so on and so
forth.
That is one element, one idea that would be interesting to hear
your views on whether you think this would be useful.
That would be the precondition, to some extent, or go in line
with prioritization of issues. Maybe we do not have to take all
decisions at the same time. Maybe some decisions are more

Page 3 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

urgent while others can wait a little longer, so if there's a feeling
that there are not enough resources to diligently deal with all
the issues that people in the community may want to discuss,
that we would try and find a process in ICANN to agree on
priorities for a particular year or for a particular time period or
just a order that they should be first, and once we resolve that,
we resolve something else.
So the question of reducing the parallel work streams that there
are to some more urgent or more key ones compared to others
that may come later is something that keeps coming up, at least
in the GAC, as one potential solution to this workload problem.
And another element is of a slightly different kind but it's also
something that keeps consuming unnecessary resources, in the
view of many. It is that a better accessibility of the work streams
and easier access on the Web site, better signaling of papers, in a
sense, who is issuing a paper to whom, a clear reference to the
process that this paper is part of a discussion, explanation of
acronyms that you know if you see something that whether this
is of relevance to you or not, whether this is the latest document
because it has a date or a version number on it. All these small
things and more user-friendly guidance on the Web site to find
out what are the ongoing work streams throughout ICANN and
also in each silo, so that attempts would be made to reduce the
time, in particular, for the non-insiders, for those who have

Page 4 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

limited resources, that they would more easily find access to a
particular work stream that they are interested in.
That is another element that some people have brought up that
should be discussed.
These are things that could be done on ICANN level.
Also, the question, can cross-constituency coordination and
reporting be improved in order to facilitate and simplify
interaction between the silos? We'll hear, probably in the next
session, some of the experiences that people made with the
discussions here where we had a lot more cross-constituency
interaction, so this is also linked to this experience.
And then another element, of course, is the -- which is an
ongoing discussion in several places in this organization, a lot of
the work is based on volunteer resources that are also limited.
They are -- there's a question of the sustainability of the
volunteer model and so on and so forth.
I would propose that we do not concentrate on this because this
has been and is being discussed in several other places. My
proposal would be to concentrate more on the -- things like the
issues that I mentioned at first, and the whole thing has two
levels. One is planning prioritization and so on on ICANN level
where all constituencies would need to agree that we focus on

Page 5 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

this first and then that -- first that has priority -- this has priority
over this. And the same could or should be applied also in the
silos, that for those who suffer in their particular silos, that there
can be annual planning in the silos and maybe a higher
prioritization in the silos. But of course this is independent -interdependent because if something is priority for ICANN, you
somehow probably also need to deal with this in a silo.
I'll stop here for the time being. I hope that you will contribute
with your thoughts and ideas.
Maybe you think there's no workload issue at all, that everything
is smooth and easy. Maybe you share the concerns that I've
expressed that have been articulated in the GAC and with others.
Yes. The floor is open.
I need a pen to do it. Let's take microphone number 4 first,
please.

CHUCK GOMES:

Hi. This is Chuck Gomes from the Registry Stakeholder Group.
These are all good ideas on the screen but they're extremely
difficult to do in a very, very diverse community. Let me just pick
on one to start with, prioritization.

Page 6 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

Prioritization assumes that we can all agree on the priority.
Now, I think we had two examples recently where we did, the
IANA transition and the stewardship -- excuse me, and the
accountability.
community.

But that doesn't happen very often in our
We all have different priorities, and that's

legitimate. The ccNSO has different priorities than the GNSO.
The ASO has different priorities. The GAC has different priorities.
The chances of us successfully prioritizing the average issues
that we're dealing with is very low in my opinion, and I
happened to go through that for a couple years in the GNSO.
Even within the GNSO, we're so diverse that really coming up to
an agreement on priorities is very difficult. That doesn't mean
we shouldn't try because there will be times when we can, but
let's just realize that these aren't easy solutions.
Even planning. Of course, we want to plan and we want to do
that. But our environment is so dynamic and changing, and we
set out work plans and we have to continually adjust them.
That's part of the model that we're in. I'm not trying to be
pessimistic.
The one thing I'll say that probably will help us more than
anything else is to increase the number of volunteers. And that's
not an easy task either. But our workload isn't declining, and we
need more volunteers so we can spread out the workload. Now,

Page 7 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

that's going to involve training, mentoring, et cetera. But in my
opinion, that's probably the most effective thing we can do.
That's still very challenging. Thanks.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Chuck. If it was easy, it probably would have been
done. So I think we are all with you.
[ Laughter ]
That doesn't mean we need to try.
With regard to volunteers, that's difficult for governments, as
you probably understand, because we can't just ask for people
in the street to work for us. That needs a little bit of preparation.
Olga from Argentina.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Chair. And fully agree with Chuck in his comments
and the diversity.
I would like to make some comments about the work -- about
the Web site, the ICANN Web site. I've been around ICANN for
more than ten years. And I've been seeing different stages of the
development of the Web site. I know it's a Web site with a lot of
information, which is perfect.

Page 8 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

There was a time that you could search for words and it worked
perfectly. And for me that was fantastic. It was -- it made my life
very easy to go through the Web site. I am fine. Thanks. That is
gone. I don't know what happened. There was a time that it
was restructured, rechanged, and I don't know. And that for me
-- it takes a lot of time.
Another comment about the Web site is when we review the
public comment documents, it is not easy. It's difficult to find it.
And once you find them, then you have to open document by
document to review all the comments that are being made. And
that takes at least for me a lot of time.
So if that could be structured in perhaps in a Web form and also
the Wikis are difficult to follow and to find the information in,
that would help. ICANN is not my only activity in my work. So
anything that makes my time easier and my life easier with the
Web site, that could be extremely helpful. Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Maybe we could do a straw poll interim. Who has a life outside
of ICANN?
[ Laughter ]
This is a private issue. That was a joke.

Page 9 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

I think, Michele, were you at microphone 2? You have the
microphone in the room. Use microphone number 2, please,
Michele.

MICHELE NEYLON:

Thank you. Michele Neylon for the record. I think it's -- first off, I
think it's great that we're having this conversation because I
think it's long overdue. There's been conversations in various
parts of the different silos but not one engaging the GAC and
others.
I'd also agree with you, Thomas. If it was easy, we'd probably
have solved it by now. But just speaking both as the outgoing
Chair of the registrars and just as an individual registrar, we
suffer from the same challenges that GAC members suffer from.
I can't just kind of go along and grab some random person to
come along and represent my company's interests at ICANN.
As a business, you have to weigh up the cost of that person's
time, the participation, whether they're able to actually deal
with all the complexities of ICANN. And as Olga points out, trying
to even navigate the Web site can be a challenge, trying to
navigate comments, which some people submit as PDFs, some
people submit as Word documents, et cetera, et cetera, et
cetera. I mean, there's a bunch of challenges.

Page 10 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

Some of it comes back, I think, to how things are communicated.
And this is something I've raised on various calls that you were
on and other meetings which we've had at the level of the chairs
of the various groups, the SOs, ACs, SGs, and whatever the other
acronym is.
A lot of the time there are issues being discussed that have an
impact on lots of different businesses and other, quote-unquote,
stakeholders, yet they're framed using such anachronistic
acronyms and language, that it's very, very hard for somebody
to read it and go, "Oh, this impacts me. I should care about this.
I need to find out more about this. This could screw up my
business. This could have a negative impact on how I interact
with the Internet." But, unfortunately, we don't see that.
What we see instead is tons and tons of acronyms. The running
joke within ICANN is any work that we do, we have to come up
with a new acronym for it or else it won't be considered valid.
That's hilarious but it doesn't help.
So, I mean, I think part of it is around how these things are
communicated. On the registrar side, we have a fairly active
membership who are very vocal on some topics but trying to get
engagement across many of the other topics is really, really
hard. And in terms of prioritization, this is something that
doesn't seem to happen. It just seems to be a case of here's, yes,

Page 11 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

another work stream. Here's yet another cross-community PDP.
Here's yet another project that simply has to happen. But
nobody seems to be looking at simple things like: How many
people are interacting and engaged in different working groups
at any given time? And are they the same people turning up in
every single working group? Or is there actual diversity? So if
you were to say persons A, B, and C, is every single working
group going to have person A or B or C in each one or are we
seeing D, E, F, G and the rest of the alphabet?
It seems a lot of the time that we're seeing the same people over
and over again. So we're not getting fresh blood in, which
means that those of us who are actively engaged are
overworked and end up looking like Thomas does at the end of
an ICANN meeting.
[ Laughter ]
So, I mean, I think the prioritization needs to be -- is something
that needs to be looked at properly and the impact of different
work products on others.
I mean, WHOIS is one I have raised in the past where there's
multiple WHOIS-related activities. And it takes so long for some
to finish that by the time you finished one, there's something
that's come along behind it which has already changed it which
seems just a little bit illogical. Thanks.

Page 12 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you, Michele. I have Indonesia. Please for those who -present yourself quickly because not everybody may know you.
Thank you. Microphone 2.

ASHWIN SASONGKO:

Hello. Yes, thank you. Ashwin from Indonesia.
Thanks, Thomas.
Yes, there's a pile of work we have to do, especially in a country
where the capabilities of all the stakeholders has to be
strengthened again. It has to be strengthened. This is really a
challenge for the person who represent the country in the
ICANN. We have the GAC. We have the GNSO. We have the
ccNSO. We have the ALAC and so on and so on and so on.
So, I think in this case, because of the diversity of the work, the
depth of the work, and so many areas of the work, I think the
help of ICANN at a regional level can be strengthened to brief or
to facilitate for the country, for every country to unite, to
integrate their capabilities, to respond to particular -- to some
particular important activities. Just, for example, I mention a
few -- an hour ago or so I mention about the I.P. version 4, I.P.
version 6. It cannot communicate. That is important if the
country doesn't finalize its transfer from I.P. Version 4 to I.P.

Page 13 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

version 6 on time. That country might not be able to contact
with other corporations that has only I.P. version 6 for contact,
just an example.
If it is person, still it is okay. What about if it is machine to
machine?

The corporation is producing equipment, say,

locomotive or planes where the machines can communicate
only in I.P. version 6.

Then me as the buyer cannot

communicate with the machines that I buy because it's
different. So that's kind of things that has to ring the bell. But it
may happen that the local organization may not have the
capabilities to recognize that this is important, we have to do
this, this, and this.
So in this case, that's the -- hopefully the local ICANN hub can
support this.

Of course, you know the hub has to be

strengthened, too. You cannot only rely on one guy only. So
that's -- Thomas, thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Ashwin. The awareness raising and understanding is
one important thing. The other thing in addition is the actual -once you realize that something is important, then you need to
engage. And I think that's important. So we have Number 4.
Sebastien and then Kavouss from Iran.

Page 14 of 51

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Sebastien Bachollet speaking. I will speak in French.
I am not representing France so I won't say "Sebastien from
France."

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

No. But you can say that you are a French person, that you are
in Finland.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Thank you very much, then. For me this is a fundamental issue,
especially for Internet individual users representing At-Large
because we do not work -- we do not make a living on that. And
the time for our professional life and family life is not something
infinite. So the fact of having a multiplication of working groups
at any level within ICANN and also at a national level to prepare
the meetings at a regional level, well, this, in fact, represents
difficulty for us. And it is of vital importance that we find a way
of dealing with this issue.
I believe that part of the response to this would be to begin by
accepting that we cannot do everything. And we need to accept
that we cannot be everywhere at any time, to know everything
and verify that everything is working.

Page 15 of 51

This means that

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

sometimes those who are not actively engaged should be able
to express their points of view to provide input and without
telling them you should be able to participate if you wanted to
provide your input. So this is not working because, otherwise,
we need to be everywhere at any time so that we can be taken
into account.
So in our organization, within the working groups, within the
different discussions and debates that are inside ICANN, we
need to verify, we need to see that those that are engaged do
participate. So meetings during the afternoon, these meetings,
these committee meetings should enable us to improve the
situation from now on. And I hope this would be the same in the
future.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Sebastien. This reminds me of the double
-- the CCWG and the CWG process because in these processes
where people participating in teleconferences during five days a
week and sometimes the discussion was open.

You were

expecting to receive comments. And at that time, people who
were not able to participate on a daily basis were able to
participate.
So the real challenge would be that those people participating
later would be able to receive the feedback from these people to

Page 16 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

be able to do their best so that they can participate and so that
they can understand and express themselves when it comes to
different issues. That would be very important. And now I will
give the floor to Kavouss from Iran.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Thank you very much. I'm speaking in my personal capacity. I
would like to support people proposing this. I don't want to
discourage them. We can discuss this. If there is a method to
deal with this issue, that's fine. So let's talk about these. Let's
add the text, but we need to begin at once.
Everything is difficult at the very beginning. The CCWG was
impossible at the beginning in November 2014. It was really
impossible to get organized, but we did it.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Kavouss.
Mic number 4. New Zealand please. You have the floor.

JEN THOMAS:

Jen Thomas (phonetic) on behalf of the GAC and the broader
community. New Zealand was one of the countries that talked
about this a lot in the GAC and the benefit we could have from a
discussion. It came out of an sense of something's got to give.

Page 17 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

Really?

EN

The intense workload we have had for the IANA

transition, we are looking into the future and it doesn't actually
look like it's going to reduce. So looking at the things we've got
up on the slide, we give a big yes to plan prioritization. We think
the community as a whole needs to discuss this, to think about
how we shift the model and have a real discussion about the
different things in each community and how we can pick up
those priorities rather than battling each other out for who has
got the most time on the schedule.
We could all try to agree as a start perhaps on the maximum
number

of

policy

development

processes

supporting

organizations can run at the same time. Or possibly when you
are setting up in your working group or cross-community
working group that you identify other work streams that relate
to it. So we are forced at the start to assist whether we are
duplicating or if we are actually adding value.
The Web site structure the GAC has had a preview for also seems
to be a very good start in facilitating better ways in engaging,
getting through the acronyms, and really understanding what
different groups are doing.
We would also just like to make a final comment on the
sustainability of the volunteer model. I think support for the
advisory committees is pretty critical in this. We've heard from a

Page 18 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

couple of people that volunteers aren't an unlimited resource
and also someone has got to pay for them or they have got to
give up their own time, which is certainly not unlimited.
Looking at how ICANN can help all ACs to engage, for example,
with the work, we have had a dedicated secretariat. We have
had a really great way to get new people in and get them up to
speed quickly so that they can pick up the issues they care
about.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, New Zealand.
I have microphone Number 1.

NICK WOOD:

Hello. My name is Nick. I am from the U.K -- on the GAC for the
U.K.
Thank you very much to the people that sort of have convened
this session. I have been here for a year, and I have just been
astonished by the commitment of everyone in this community.
The level of enthusiasm and drive and energy is astonishing. It
really is. I have never known anything like it. So a big pat on the
back to everyone for sure.

Page 19 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

I really like the bullet points that you've got up here. I think
they're sensible -- a sensible starting point. And one thing I
found really interesting recently was I managed to pop along to
the GDD Summit only for a day. Last month I didn't realize I was
there. I was able to sneak in and sneak out and no one attacked
me.
But what I really realized at that meeting was the issues that the
various people in the GNSO have. There are business issues,
which influence kind of their urgency to get on with certain
tracks of work. And I didn't know that previously, and I didn't
know that because I spent all my time at ICANN meetings in the
GAC room.
And that kind of really, really hit home to me at that GDD
Summit. I need to get out of the GAC room more and have more
time to go and speak to people and sit in their sessions.
And I think so the idea of getting together, you know, maybe it's
-- whether it's through chairs or groups, I think that's really,
really positive. The more we can understand each other's -- sort
of the way each other works and the pressures which drive the -the broad spectrum of work that we're doing the better. And I
know this will be a challenge certainly to -- you know, to the
businesses within ICANN, but sometimes you don't have to go
fast to be productive.

Page 20 of 51

And I think some of the issues, the

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

challenges that we have in the GAC is that it does take a long
time to develop positions. We have to consult all of these other
government departments and the machinations of government
are very slow. I know it frustrates lots of people. It frustrates
me.
But when I used to play sport and, you know, I used to play
rugby and we'd have our sort of, you know, attack and defense
and we would always say in defense you've got to go at the pace
of the slowest man because otherwise you create dog legs and
that creates weaknesses. And maybe there's an element of that
kind of thinking that maybe if we sort of slowed down a little bit
we might actually become more -- quicker in the long term
because you won't sort of -- you might avoid these issues where
you get sort of at the end of a -- a PDP then the government
comes -- governments come in and say hold on, we're not sure,
and this kind of slows things down. And it means you can't get
on with the next thing so much. So yeah, there's just a couple of
thoughts on that. Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think your point is an extremely valid one, that if
we try to get everybody on board from the beginning, which
might take a little longer, make sure we more or less do
understand what our hopes, expectations, concerns are in the

Page 21 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

beginning, that allows us to go in the right direction from the
start. That may end up with a consensus, which is somehow the
-- the uniting element here, rather than everybody running in all
directions for the first -- at high speed for the first half of the time
and then realize that we -- that this will never work and then we
have to go back. So I think -- and that meetings like this one,
where people interact and make -- listen to each other and make
each other understand, have an actually positive impact on this.
So thank you very much for this.

Any other views?

Yes,

microphone number 2.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Hello, my name is (saying name). I'm a next gen member from
Indonesia. I'm currently studying Internet governance at the
Oxford Internet Institute in the U.K., and I understand that there
are now many education institutions actually providing formal
lessons or courses on Internet governance. Like the next gen
program, I find this to be very interesting and very useful for me
to participate in forums like this, but it won't allow me to
participate in the longer term. And I second the opinion that it
will be great if more people can volunteer. I would like to
suggest a formal like internship, perhaps like a six-month or oneyear internship, especially for students who are studying
Internet governance at the master's or the Ph.D. level. Like the
Berkman Center have a lot of students there, OII, there's also

Page 22 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

Internet governance.

EN

I think there's at least eight internet

governance courses in the U.K. alone. And ISOC U.K. has been
working on identifying these courses and actually reaching out
to the conveners of the courses to get people involved into
programs like the fellowship and the next gen. Thanks.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much. Further requests from the floor -- for the
floor? Wanawit from Thailand. Yes.

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

Okay.

Wanawit, GAC from Thailand.

I do agree on the

workloads, but I also like to point out some of the points since I
start in the beginning with the GAC. I think the workload is not
much but since Beijing if people are sitting in the room, you have
to remember how difficult it is to go through. And with the
current workload I do not know whether we have any room to
put any single work more to the GAC. And if you talk about
subsequent this round that's coming in within a year or two, I
think maybe we -- we have to sleep here for the seven days. Not
only 1:00 in the morning like it used to be. That what I worry
most, that it's not only critical in the current workload of CCWG
but work ahead. We don't have time. I remember we don't even
have dinner. We ordered pizza at 1:00 in the morning. And we
don't know the next round coming in how many strings are

Page 23 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

going to coming in. And right now we don't have -- we have a lot
of new members in. They need to know what is -- the procedure
they need to go through. Maybe there will be a new procedure
we need to study. We cannot prepare all the major roles that we
have. I think -- and not only talk about the parities between the
cross-communities but what the GAC role is is also very
important, that we need to build the capacity internally. There's
a lot of young generation in the GAC I see and I appreciate that
will come. Sooner or later I will be gone because too old already
and the new generation have to carry on the workload. And we
have to know what is our roles of the governments in the -- the
parities internally or so that we need to care internally into the
GAC. Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Wanawit. I think it is clear from those of who have
spoken that the workload is an issue. So let's try and focus
maybe on brainstorming a little more concretely. That although
it is difficult but what can be done concretely. Let's get at some
of the elements that we maybe can use if there's an attraction
for a follow-up to the session on actually not just complaining
but trying to do something, which is normally what I tend to
prefer, so that we can go a little bit into thinking about
elements. And the way I see it there's two aspects. One is
somehow planning, prioritizing more, as difficult it is, in the

Page 24 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

silos, across the silos, and the other part is facilitating access to
these things. So reducing people's -- the time that people take
to find out whether something -- what something belongs to,
what is important for me. So I see these two elements. Maybe
you see others. So I see Michele has some concrete ideas.
Thank you. Micro 2, please.

MICHELE NEYLON:

Thanks, Thomas. Michele Neylon, for the record. Within the
SO/AC leadership group there was a project being run by, I think
it was Rob Hoggarth and his team, which I think was meant to
kind of map out all of the concurrent activities being conducted
across all groups and across the entire community. Now that
needs to be just kind of made -- risen up to a higher level, made
more obvious, not buried, you know, 25 layers deep in the
subdomain of a subdomain of icann.org. That -- that needs to
be given some attention and focus so that we can all see quickly
and easily everything that's going on now at this very moment in
time. I remember, I think it was -- I don't know, maybe it was
Durban or sometime around then that somebody did up a -- just
a chart just looking at, you know, all the concurrent WHOIS
activities. And the fact that you couldn't fit it on a single slide
pretty much said everything you needed to know. If you can't fit
it on a single slide, that simply says to me there's too much
going on. So what -- just being able to visualize that easily, then

Page 25 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

you know what you're dealing with, and then from that, you can
then look at how do you prioritize those.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And maybe if you would look at these 20 processes
related to WHOIS and would see this on one slide and then see
the overlap, you could merge these into three processes where
you would take less time to follow all the 20 and map them
across each other and so on and so forth. By the way, before I
give the floor to Olga, I think it was somewhere in -- some
meetings room all look the same from the inside so you need to
remember which carpet was where in the world, but it was
Singapore or Buenos Aires or somewhere where there was one
of these so-called SO/AC chair hot topic sessions where
somebody -- I forget who it was or I may know but I won't -- I'm
not sure, that there were work streams -- discussions about the
volunteer issue, about how to simplify accessibility and have
more structured way of documenting stuff, making it accessible.
And everybody said that this is very important. Then we were all
happy that we said this is very important and I haven't heard
ever since of anything that has actually happened. And this is
something that occurs quite often in this space, that we are
swimming around and actually moving water around but we are
not really sustainably advancing. So I think that there's good
intentions spread across the community. But we need to make

Page 26 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

sure that this is actually done, and I think Michele I'm happy to
have you as a partner in pushing for more sustainability in these
exercises. Olga. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Chair.

I would like to add another layer of

complexity which is language. Imagine all of this that we are
talking about when English is your second or your third
language. So -- and also there are these webinars that the
regional offices of ICANN organize which are good but in my
modest opinion quite general. As for Latin America we usually
have very few and Pedro and I end up talking about the same
things to the -- to the audience, which is not very -- very big.
What I personally have done, especially in the process of the
IANA transition, is conducting or informally coordinating with
those that speak the same language in the same region. And it
ended up being effective. That could be perhaps somehow a
role of the regional office of ICANN, going beyond the -- the
webinar, the general webinar saying ICANN is this and this or
GNSO, GAC, blah, blah, blah. So that could be an idea to share
with the regional offices. And I will stop here. Thank you.

Page 27 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

EN

So to recap what you're saying, so it may make sense that the
regional offices and the vice presidents would help --

OLGA CAVALLI:

Beyond the webinar.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Would help bringing for instance Latin America governments
together with Latin America registries and registrars and civil
society organizations to discuss the issues in Spanish without
having to travel to Helsinki or Singapore but actually having that
meeting in Buenos Aires or Montevideo or wherever so that that
is an idea that may also help in fostering understanding and
participation. Number 2. Thank you. Microphone number 2.

MARK CARVELL:

Yes. Thank you very much, Chair. Mark Carvell, U.K. government
rep on the GAC. First of all, I'm sorry for joining this important
discussion late. I was at another meeting, which is probably an
example actually of the kind of problem we're facing. You know,
even with these important cross-community discussions, some
of us are stressed out because we have to divert to other things
going on. Hopefully that kind of problem will ease in the future.
But it's -- it's kind of illustrative also of the fact that there's a
very positive trend of working much more transversely. For

Page 28 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

example, the GAC now is getting engaged in policy development
at a very early stage through new processes and mechanisms
that are being introduced. And we're having liaison people
appointed. We've got a GNSO liaison. We've had that for a while
now, but also we have an ALAC liaison. This is all very positive in
terms of transverse or working connecting up. But there's a
tension still there in terms of loading and workloads. You know,
how are we going to connect up, work transversely when we've
all got our own dossiers and so on to pursue and then engage
with others.

So I -- you're asking, Thomas, for ideas,

brainstorming, and so on, how do we address that tension that
still impairs our ability to ensure that all processes are -- are fair
and inclusive and diverse in this same ICANN environment.
My only thought at the moment is that we have liaisons linking
up.

Maybe the liaisons could somehow centralize some

oversight of what is happening that could then harmonize the
prioritization so that you have some sense of direction for the
whole community where the difference constituencies, the SOs
and ACs, are going to have to work together on delivering on
that particular priority, and that then, in -- influences the
program scheduling, the agenda scheduling, and so on. So I
don't know, is that one idea to explore.

Through the

connections provided by the liaisons, develop some kind of
central oversight of how things are going in a direction that

Page 29 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

involves us all and that we will find the right space, time, and
resource to be able to contribute to delivering on that direction.
Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Mark. That's an interesting suggestion that may -- is
worth looking into.
Maybe -- Seeing a few members of the Board here, knowing that
-- Because I sit in with them from time to time or whenever I
have the time to go to their meetings as a liaison, knowing that
the Board is also not suffering from boredom but actually are
also quite busy, maybe it would be interesting to hear some
views from board members on how they deal with workload,
whether they have ideas about what could be done, and also
just brainstorming what the Board could do or whether the
Board could have a role in helping the community to better
prioritize, better plan, just as an idea to invite the board
members to actively participate. Of course you're free to just
listen. But it would be very interesting, I think, to hear from
board members with this.
I'd like to continue. Who is next?
Ideas, thoughts about what could be done.
Microphone 2, please.

Page 30 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

MICHELE NEYLON:

EN

Thanks. Michele for the record.
Just one thing I think we've left out from the various people and
groups that we mentioned is ICANN staff, I think. So I think
coordinating with ICANN staff and helping -- getting them to
help coordinate is key.
Ultimately -- no offense to them, but they do this for their jobs,
whereas the rest of us don't.
So I think include -- having -- including them in any
communication around prioritization is key because ultimately,
they're the kind of -- they're the glue, they're the ones that can
help bring it all together.
Another thing is, well, in relation to that, is making sure that
everybody is aligned, that there is not a case of one particular
department or one particular team pushing something harder
than needs to happen. We've seen that to a certain degree over
the last few years where there's a terrible sense of urgency
about something. It was never particularly clear as to why.
And as you mentioned it would be good to hear from the board
members since ultimately, they're the people meant to oversee
us all.

Page 31 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you.
There's micro number 1.

JONNE SOININEN:

Hello, I'm sorry Jonne Soininen, I'm the IETF liaison to the Board
and as no one else from the Board wanted to speak up, I guess I
have to.
Of course, for quite surprisingly, perhaps, for you guys is we
don't have kind of a definitive answer to this and not a single
solution how this works, but the thing is, like in any kind of
organization, first of all, planning what to do, prioritization,
these are things one should do, and they sometimes help, but I
know that it sounds really silly when somebody has a lot of work
to do and you say why don't you prioritize those, and why don't
you do all of them at the same time still.
But the other thing that's maybe in the community as well but
we started to use a little bit more in the Board is not everybody
has to be involved in the time when something is prepared. That
it's done in smaller group and then it's brought -- and then
there's at least a proposal on the table that can be discussed
with a bigger group.

Page 32 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

There is, of course, the tradeoff here in what we've seen in
ICANN that we've had some solution -- some areas where one
group has done a complete proposal, thinks that they're ready,
and that's when people jump in, and that is something that
should be, of course, avoided.
But I think that there's a question always that does everybody
have to be involved on everything in every single step or can
some of the things be a little bit divided among people?

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Jonne. I think it's a fair point that has come up
before.
That would raise the point of do you trust others to, let's call it,
represent you or think of you? And the more that that is the
case, the more you can actually share things. So that is linked.
Micro 2, Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. You said something, do we trust others. We must, and we
should. If we don't trust the people and have an environment of
doubt and mistrust, we fail. So we should put our things for the
trust unless otherwise we see something is not going well. Then
go and clear that or correct that.

Page 33 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

So apart from the trust, friendship, openness is important. But
the reason I asked the floor was not this. Was that I don't see
anything here talking about avoiding seriously workload created
by multiple or parallel working or duplications.
In your meeting few minutes or half an hour ago, I was looking at
something, I found that the five consecutive session, we are
talking of the same thing.

Repeating and repeating and

repeating. This is workload.
So how we could avoid that? And also, how could avoid that the
parallel working that people, they do things, because this is
done by should be done by me, it should be done by you. So
why not we could have a little bit more -- I come back to the
issue of dividing the activities. I think it is a good way.
In Work Stream 2, we are going to divide nine activities to nine
different group, provided that at the end, there is a possibility to
comment on that.
So, yes, it is not possible that a single person or one people
working everywhere. We should concentrate on the area that
we are expert or supposed to be expert. But giving the others a
division of the work or dividing of the work or sharing of the
work.

Page 34 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

But another important issue that I have not seen here is any
information sharing in a more fair manner. In particular, for
those who don't have the possibility to look into what has
happened. Whether there will be some sort of a small resume or
something, making easy for the people to follow up, it's
possible.
So we have to also work on that. Parallel working should be
avoided. Trust should be maintained. Friendship, so on and so
forth. And this exclusivity that this is the world I must know, it
should be avoided. We should work together collectively, and
we should work together with trust.
Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Kavouss. I think there is already a challenge in what
you say if you say parallel work should be avoided, at the same
time thing should be broken up into group. Would that mean
they would work after each other or in parallel?
So just to say that, in fact, there are no easy solutions but there
are elements that we could identify or are identifying.
And there's a lot of government people talking here, so this is
not meant to be a single or one and a half stakeholder
discussion. So, really, I would like to invite all of you. You don't

Page 35 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

have to agree with us, this is not the point, but you share your
views and contribute to that discussion.
Michele, micro 2.

MICHELE NEYLON:

Thanks, Thomas. Michele Neylon again.
Just picking up on the point from -- I'm going to get his name
wrong. Nick. Sorry. I think it is something that I've noticed, you
know, over the years, that, you know, a lot of people don't really
understand where other people are coming from in terms of the
kind of pressures that they're working on, the motivations, the
drivers, the limitations.
I mean, this -- You mentioned the term silos. I've used it in the
past as well.
Maybe something, just throwing it out there, maybe at some
point, not necessarily at the next ICANN meeting but maybe at a
future ICANN meeting, maybe there would be some way for, you
know, different groups just to give kind of a quick elevator pitch
as to where the hell they're coming from and why -- why they're
here or what the problem is which might help. Or if there's some
way for us to, you know, just interact in a way so that somebody
like Nick can go back to the U.K. government and say, well, the
registrars aren't being total and utter scumbags. It's just that,

Page 36 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

realistically, what you've asked them to do would bankrupt
them.
And, you know, we can then go back to our stakeholders and go,
well, the GAC aren't being obstinate -- I was going to use a nasty
expletive. Better not. They are coming under pressure because
of, you know, some treaty negotiation that we don't know
about.
I just think it's -- giving a little bit more color may be helping
people to have better understanding of the motivations,
because I think a lot of the time, when you have conversations
with people, sometimes you're talking across each other
because there's a lack of understanding of how we actually
operate in our, you know, real jobs.
Thanks.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And I think we've already experienced this in this
meeting, at least in our case. For instance, we used to have
meetings, bilaterals with the Board or with the GNSO in one
hour. You try to raise ten issues. A GAC member presents an
issue, and then the answer you get, yes, this is important, we
need to look into it, or normally the answers are not very
substantive. But this time with this cross-community session

Page 37 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

but also with the fact that we were mutually inviting each other
in our silos, and you deal with one issue for an hour or at least
half an hour, you actually get much of what you said as
background information for why people are asking for what they
are in a much more holistic way that allows you actually to
understand much better and to take the other situation into
better account when you continue to work. So I think that's a
fundamental point.
I understand we have Chuck again on mic 4.
Thank you, Chuck.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you, Thomas. Chuck Gomes again. And I want to add
something to the list. I think we should be continually looking
for new tools that make collaboration easier.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think that's a good sum up to a lot of what we
discussed.
Two. Mark, I think.

MARK CARVELL:

Yes, thank you. Mark Carvell, U.K. government. I think the last
three interventions, Kavouss started it, really, with the issue of

Page 38 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

trust, and then communication, and new tools. I think these are
all linked up because they enhance transparency. If there's
effective communication of what role everybody has and what
work they're engaged on and what their forward look is, then
people have a better understanding.
So -- And to be able to be armed with that when you -- before
you go to a meeting. When I first turned up at ICANN meetings, I
was in total disorientation. I just couldn't work out what the hell
was going on, you know, and it took about three meetings,
really, to settle down with some real understanding.
I think it's better now, but I think this -- taking this discussion
forward should look at the communication strategy, how that
enhances transparency, and in turn, fosters trust so you know
what else is going on and what you don't need to get involved in
and what you do need to get involved in. And that will, I think,
help.
I think there's work to be done to enhance all of that. And that's
my thought.
Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Page 39 of 51

Thank you, Mark.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

Maybe we have a few minutes left.
Should we brainstorm a little bit on how we may -- before I give
the floor to Olof, how we may organize ourselves in a way that
we capture these elements that we've been gathering? I mean,
this is all in the transcript and Tracey has been taking notes, but
do we need another process to simplify the other processes; i.e.,
should we somehow get together those who are willing to
actually improve this? And then where and what, on what level,
how to include the Board in these deliberations; maybe the SO,
AC, RALO, and whatever there is in terms of chairs and co-chairs.
Or should we just -- I'm not talking about the new CCWG,
although it may -- So how should we drive this forward with a
view to maximize coming up with the simplest solution possible
or things that could be implemented and tested in the near
future? Building on this meeting, which I think has been a big
insight in many ways. That for -- And hope that we get some
ideas on this.
Olof from ICANN staff, supporting the GAC.

OLOF NORDLING:

Thank you, Chair. And while you all are thinking about that -well, I'm Olof Nordling, ICANN staff. I don't know if you're
allowed to chip in here, but know --

Page 40 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Actually, we need to censor you, so please stop.

OLOF NORDLING:

I thought so.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Very sorry.

EN

[ Laughter ]
Olof, go ahead.

OLOF NORDLING:

But I think it has been mentioned recently by many that trust is a
key element when working together. And trust is something you
have to earn, and that takes time. And that's a difficult part of it.
And you would see it -- Looking back at my experience.
And that's an difficult part of it. You would see it -- looking back
at my experience and not only within ICANN in all sort of
associations and groupings and such, well, it takes time before
that trust is established in a particular group.
Once that is established, then you can start to rationalize and
you can start to distribute work and you can start to use other
approaches than sitting all together and keeping a close tab on

Page 41 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

what everybody else is trying to get away with, which you don't
like. Try, for example, to use rapporteurs and also to use -- and
that's really something that should be considered, like Chuck
mentioned, better collaboration tools, yes.
And more importantly to use more and better collaboration
tools that enables remote participation because it's not in
everybody's ability to physically come to all these meetings.
And we need to do work in between the meetings as well.
And in order to do that, we need to have trust, yes. And we need
to have good tools. And, well, something to look for but in the
very beginning, we need to have trust.
And then I would like to get back to Michele's proposal. I think it
is almost like, all right, let's have speed dating.
Well, a registrar meets a GAC representative for five minutes and
exchange things across the border. And then you change and
the registrar meets someone from the ccNSO and so on and so
forth.
So, well, at least that's one of the means. I mean, it's very much
on the -- how to socialize with each other in order to promote
and actually to gain trust because that has to be deserved. It
doesn't come automatically.

Page 42 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you, Olof. I like the speed dating idea. We'll set up a
matrix where people can put themselves in and then we'll mix it
randomly, of course.
You're right. Trust takes time. But we won't get better human
beings just with time passing. And as you say, we need tools.
We need to implement structures that actually create incentives
for people to trust each other or are (indiscernible).
If you take the GAC, I think it's easier to trust governments if they
don't lock their doors and you don't know what they're talking
but if they can actually check what they are saying, how they are
argumenting. So opening up doors is one of the elements that
leads to trust.
The other one is providing for space to interact, not just to listen
but to be listened mutually and understand which is normally
the basis of -- in the U.N., this is called confidence-building
measures in other context. But I think that term is not too wrong
and so on and so on.
So we need to develop tools, find tools, ideally easy tools, lowhanging fruit first, and then other things maybe later where we
can improve trust because, as we've heard, it helps in many
ways and being more efficient if you trust people. But if you
have to check everything somebody is doing for what may have

Page 43 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

been the reasons or is there a hidden agenda and so on and so
forth?
We have a little bit of time, ten minutes. But we can also, of
course, enjoy our coffee break, which at least the GAC people
didn't have. But I would still continue to invite people to take
the floor.
I see Nigel with a great color of a tie. Microphone number 3.

NIGEL HICKSON:

Thank you. Nigel Hickson, ICANN staff. It's a great pleasure
actually to talk as staff in this session. And that's one of the
themes I wanted to put across because I think someone said it
earlier.
I mean, staff have a particular role. Actually, I don't particularly
like the word "staff." But us that are employed at ICANN have a
role. And, of course, we are not volunteers. We are paid for what
we do. I think the majority of staff -- or all the staff work
incredibly hard and as you've seen during the transition and in
preparation for these meetings.
But I think what we've learned from this meeting is something
which is relevant to the, if you like, the volunteer effort and the
amount of time we will spend on these issues. And that's the
breaking down of silos and the more informal work -- the more

Page 44 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

informal ways of working because I think one of the problems of
this sort of community staff relation thing is the formality of the
process.
I think in the future, as someone said earlier, we need to sort of
break that down. We need to have a sort of system whereby -where if the GAC want advice from staff or if the GAC want to talk
to staff or the GNSO wants to talk to staff or if anyone wants to
interact, there can be more interaction because some of the
structures we have are far too formal where a staff member will
just start off a session and then the community take it over from
there.
We as staff feel a bit reluctant to get involved because it's your -it's your session and, of course, it's your session. But in this way
of working to reduce the amount of effort that everyone has to
put in, I think this breaking down of barriers has to occur. Thank
you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Nigel. And thank you for coming in.
I think it is crucial what you say because that's also an element,
the more you trust each other, the less you have to rely on
formalities that protect you from fears of being abused or taken
wrong or whatever. So this is also linked to trust. But not

Page 45 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

everything is a question of life and death and needs ten formula
and five page of legal advice in how to give a simple answer to a
simple question. So I'm fully with you, and I think there's room
for improvement there.
I know people in the countryside, for instance, in my country,
they do contracts about buying and selling houses with
handshakes. And if there's a problem, they sort it out later. It
doesn't mean that everything is so simple as maybe in the
valleys where I grew up. But sometimes you can really ask
yourself whether all these formalities are really necessary. That
also reduces workload for everybody. Thank you.
Yes, Olga.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Chair. About staff, apart from the facts that we know
which staff do what, sometimes when we move away from our
usual activity within ICANN, it is difficult to know who to contact
with. For example, we wanted to organize a workshop in Dublin
and I contacted, like, three different persons. And then Jeanne
came to me after the meeting and said, You should have
contacted me before because I am the one.
So sometimes it's difficult for us. The organization has been
growing in number of staff, which is good because it shows that

Page 46 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

there are more things being done. But sometimes at least for
me it's difficult to know who should I -- and so I talk to different
people and then I -- it takes some time to realize who to talk
with. So I don't know how to solve that, but it's something that
happened to me two or three times. Thank you.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Olga. I think that's another element that we would
like to retain.
Further comments? Questions? Ideas? Illusions? Mic -- Michele.

MICHELE NEYLON:

Thanks. Next time just give me a seat up there. It will be easier.
[ Laughter ]
Just picking up again on this entire thing of the speed dating, I
think maybe -- maybe something like that, maybe some kind of
format along that could help. But I think there should definitely
be alcohol involved.
[ Laughter ]

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Page 47 of 51

Or tea for those who don't.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

MICHELE NEYLON:

EN

Tea for the teetotalers. Coffee for the coffee drinkers.
If you look at the meeting here in Helsinki, every evening there
was an ICANN-organized cocktail. So, you know, repurpose
something like that.

It's not -- there's obviously a budget

available to provide the drinks. Repurpose it slightly. So it
doesn't have to be an expensive, complicated, over-overengineered thing.
I mean, I found it amusing that at some point there this
afternoon you spoke about discussing coming up with a process
to improve the process. And while I know that as a lifetime civil
servant and diplomat this might suit you, it's just so ICANNesque. I just thought to myself, my God, you are trying to
improve things by making them worse. Congratulations.
We don't need to overengineer every single thing. I mean, I
could be quite flippant about it. But at the same time, I think
sometimes simple things are probably the best. And, again,
from Nigel's perspective, I'm not sure -- I don't think it's that far - that formal definitely on the GNSO side for us to engage with
staff because we engage with them on a regular basis, because
we have a very different relationship with them as we're
contracted parties -- well, speaking on the registrars and
registries side.

Page 48 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

But, I mean, to Olga's point, it can get confusing knowing who to
speak to at times because people move around, people move
on. So maybe that could help, too. Maybe just making that
clearer as to who's in charge of what and when because the
organization has evolved.
And, luckily, we got rid of global leaders so now we have
executives, which I think is a wonderful improvement.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Michele.
Just a few replies. First, I would have loved you to sit next to me
and many others as well. Those who know me, I'm a team
player. I don't like standing somewhere alone normally. The
problem is I was so overloaded with work, I didn't even have the
time to write you an email or give you a phone call. Next time
just join in voluntarily.
And with regard to social events and alcohol, I think social
events are an important element. We had once dinner in the
GAC because we had a sponsor in Buenos Aires. And that was
proved to be extremely helpful also for new people to get to
know who knows what and so on. We may have, like, events or
forms of events that take care of cultural diversity for those who
prefer a sport event, like -- I don't know -- playing a football

Page 49 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

EN

game somewhere or drinking a beer or doing something else.
The idea of social events that help you connect is definitely
another thing that I'm very happy to take.
And the thing about processes, that was slightly ironic because
this is -- in the past years whenever a problem came up,
somebody hired a new expert group and they created a new
super team of super people to discuss something. And I didn't
mean to do that.
But actually the problem is that sometimes if you don't create a
shell for something to be tracked -- and I'm referring in
particular to these discussions. We've had these discussions
before but nothing happened. So either you need people that
you can trust that they will take it up, then you don't need a
process; you need people. And if that is not there, you need to
find the easiest possible process to actually put some, let's say,
public pressure on somebody who signs up to a process that he
would actually or she would actually deliver. So we don't need a
process if we get people to take this on without a process, all the
better. If not, we would have to think about a process.
But I'm fully with you. The simpler the better, the less -- the less
-- go ahead. Take the mic and say --

Page 50 of 51

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Workload Scheduling and Management

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(off microphone).

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

EN

[ Laughter ]
We have two minutes left. Is there anybody who wants to take
the floor? If not, I think we can use these two minutes to have a
little bit of break. I hope that this is the beginning -- I hope that
this is the beginning of a sustainable way forward on this, and I
invite everybody to continue to brainstorm whether or not we
have a process. I don't really care. I would like to see things
improving. That's my concern.
Thank you all very much. And the next session will be here at
5:00. So don't go too far away. Thank you.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 51 of 51

