HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 08:30 to 09:15 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

KATRINA SATAKI:

Three minutes. You asked. Three minutes left, so prepare
yourselves for [Botox] for someone.
Good morning, dear colleagues. It’s 8:30, and we are about to
start our ccNSO meeting, here in Helsinki.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Cheers.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Cheers.

KATRINA SATAKI:

I see that the audience clearly enjoys themselves, and it’s very
great to see that you are so enthusiastic about our ccNSO –
actually, I have to tell you that this is the first time for me, in my
capacity as the Chair of the ccNSO. Yes, so I have the honor to
open the meeting and welcome you all here.
Second is this is the first time we have policy form, or Meeting B.
So please pay attention to the agenda. You know, the main idea
of the Meeting B is to break the silos. So we work in silos until

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

3:00 PM, and then we go out to the wild and meet other people,
basically. Yes, it might be a little bit scary, but this is an
experiment and we hope that it will work.
Yes, well, going out of the silos, it’s one thing. But we, together
with the Meetings Program Working Group, we do not think that
everybody should go into the same door. So we think that it’s
good to have some options to choose from. Therefore, we tried
to select some cross-community sessions that would be
interesting for at least most members of our community.
Shortly, Alejandra will tell you more about the new format and
what to expect from ccNSO meetings here in Helsinki.
Well, it’s great to be so close to home, at least for me. Maybe
some of you have traveled halfway around the world. But for me,
it’s the closest ICANN meeting ever, I think. The local hosts, I
think they did a lot for us to feel welcome and to feel safe here.
And I think it’s especially nice that you have the raincoats,
because they know what to expect from the weather here. It was
really helpful, and therefore I’d like to give the floor to Juhani,
the host, to welcome us here in his hometown.

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Well, thank you, Katrina. Actually, we really did all we could for
this meeting. For example, I ran the last kilometer here not to be
late. So I might look quite warm, and that’s true.

Page 2 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So finally, I got you here. So welcome to Helsinki. I think most of
you know me by face, maybe by name, like Katrina did. Thank
you. So this my 28th ICANN meeting, and finally it’s in Helsinki. So
I’m really proud host this time. And this year, it’s quite
remarkable for .fi in two ways. First, it’s of course this ICANN
meeting. So sometimes small things, like invisible viruses, has a
huge impact. And this time it brought ICANN here. And actually,
we got this meeting with very short notice and it required a lot
from my team, flexibility and hard work.
And a good example is last night, at the city hall, Katrina just
mentioned, “Juhani, would you like to have a few words in the
opening of the ccNSO day?” And, well, I couldn’t refuse that. And
of course, I will have. But maybe I looked at bit tired or stressed
or whatsoever. So my team members, Sanna and [Ann], are you
here? They are not. Actually, they wrote me a speech that I
should have here this morning. Well, I have that speech here, but
I will skip it this time. Instead, I will read it this evening at the
ccNSO cocktail. So if you come there, you will just get the speech
that was written for me.
Okay, but the second big thing this year, it’s a big change that .fi
is about have in two months’ time, September 5th, it’s going to
be a huge change in our policy and in our technical platform.
And I’m going to have a presentation about that later today.

Page 3 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So what else I can say? Well, just welcome to Helsinki, and I hope
you will find this meeting interesting, like ICANN meetings are
always, and you will enjoy your stay here in Helsinki. Welcome.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you very much. I can assure you that Juhani’s team was
really very happy that Juhani was given this opportunity to
present, not because of the honor, because now he had to get
up earlier than usual, apparently. Thank you very much, and I’ll
see you all tonight at the cocktail.
Now I’d like to give the floor to Alejandra, the Chair of Meeting
Program Working Group. And she will guide you through the two
upcoming days.

ALEJANDRA REYNOSO:

Thank you very much. Good morning, everyone. First I want to
draw your attention to your folders. We now have a very special
ccNSO ribbon that you can attach to your badge so people know
that you are from the ccNSO.
And now we will walk through the agenda that we have for this
meeting. So – oh, clicker maybe? Or next, please. I can’t. Oh,
there.

Page 4 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

This is a policy forum. The Meeting B, as Katrina was saying, has
a new format. So next, please, Kim. Thank you.
The new format is that it’s only four days. We don’t have
welcome ceremony, public forums, public Board meeting, or a
sponsored exhibition area, as you have noticed for now. And we
will be having exclusive ccNSO meeting only from 8:00 to 3:00
PM. After that, it’s cross-community work, and we will talk about
it in the next slide, please.
So in the Hall A, it’s where all the general cross-community
sessions are taking place. But we felt, at the Program Working
Group, that not all of those cross-community sessions were to
ccNSO interesting, though they might be. So we thought you
should have a choice. So most of them are gTLD-centered crosscommunity sessions, except those on Wednesday. But for us, we
prepare a couple more. So next slide, please.
So on Tuesday – that’s today – we will have a joint meeting with
the GAC at 3:00 PM in their room. It’s Hall A. And after that, we
come back here to talk about the operational side of ICANN.
These are in parallel with some general cross-community
sessions, but we thought that these would be of interest for the
community.
And on Wednesday, on Helsinki Hall, we will have the Country
and Other Geographic Names Forum. This was prepared for

Page 5 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

everyone to attend, but it’s special for our community. So we
invite you to go to that one. And after that, in the Hall A, there
will be a discussion on future cross-community working groups.
So this is the suggestions for the meetings after the ccNSO
sessions.
Next, please.
In this meeting, we will be discussing, of course, of CWG and
CCWG on Tuesday and Wednesday. On Tuesday, the Chair of the
meeting will be Lise Furh, and on Wednesday, it will be Mathieu.
Next, please.
We will have, today, soon an update regarding the PDP of the
Retirement of ccTLDs and the Review Mechanism for the
decisions on delegations, revocations, and retirement of the
ccTLDs.
Next, please.
And we will have other sessions, working group updates and
IANA updates, and our special ccTLD news session.
Next, please.
And also, we will have legal session, Regional Organizations
update, and the marketing session.
Next, please.
Page 6 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And today, we will have the ccNSO cocktail. And it’s pretty close
to here. It’s 15-minute walk. It will be in Café Piritta. If you will
take any pictures, and if you want to share them, do it on Twitter
on #ccNSOcocktail so we can gather them all.
And next, please.
We want to thank very much to our generous sponsor, .fi. That is
the one that made the ccNSO cocktail possible.
So that’s it. Next slide, please. And welcome to the ccNSO.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you very much, Alejandra. So I hope you got the grasp of
what to expect and you’re ready for the next session. And the
next session, we have updates on working groups. And I’d like to
ask Giovanni and Christian to join us here. And we’ll start with
SOP update from Giovanni and then TLD-OPS update from
Christian.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Good morning, and thank you for the opportunity to provide you
an update on the work of the ccNSO Strategy and Operating
Plan Working Group.
Okay, next slide, please. I do like Alejandra. And thank you, Kim.

Page 7 of 95

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

So we had quite a good meeting yesterday. And we discussed
about some work that has been done in the past months by the
working group and ICANN. First of all, the ccNSO Strategy and
Operating Plan Working Group submitted its input to ICANN on
the fiscal year ’17 Operating Plan and Budget on the 25th of April.
And high level, we stressed the fact that there have been many
improvements over the past three, four years in the way ICANN
is presenting those plans. Although there is still the big
weakness, which is try to have more KPIs and timeframes
included in the Operating Plan and Budget.
There’s

been

also

the

acknowledgement

of

some

inconsistencies in the plan. And that is because the work that is
done by Xavier’s team, the CFO of ICANN, is still collect and
collate all the input received from the different departments of
ICANN. So he, himself, told us yesterday that it’s true that some
departments, they’re providing with more information. Some
others are a bit less generous in submitting information to him.
So at the end, there are some gaps in information within the
Operating Plan and Budget. And so what Xavier’s team is trying
to do is make sure that there is more consistency, in terms of the
information that are provided at different levels in the plan, as
for the actions, the objectives, the timeframes, and much more.
One important element that I would like to stress, and it was
anticipated by Alejandra, is that today at 6:00, there is the very

Page 8 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

first new session that is a sort of spinoff of the ccNSO Strategy
and Operating Plan Working Group. Because it started with –
5:00, sorry – because it started with a request we had during the
Marrakesh meeting. And this request was to try to have a more
in-depth presentation about certain areas of ICANN, where the
ccNSO SOP, for many years requested more information,
clarification. And so today, from 5:00 to 6:30, if I’m not mistaken,
in this room – yes – there’s going to be Susanna Bennett, COO of
ICANN, and Sally Costerton, who is the Senior Advisor to the
President, and Senior Vice President Global Stakeholder
Engagement. And they will present their plans for their
respective areas. And more precisely, they will introduce a bit
more details regarding the HR policy of ICANN and also the
Global Stakeholder Engagement, with the office and hub
strategy of ICANN, with the regional strategies that ICANN has in
place for the different worldwide regions. And so it’s a good
moment to get more information about those two areas, and
eventually for the ccNSO SOP and the entire system. So it is a
good moment to get those information that we have been
looking for, for several years. And so this is today at 5:00, in this
room.
We also, in the feedback that we provided and submitted to
ICANN on the fiscal year ’17 Operating Plan and Budget, we
recommended a more prudent approach to certain expenses.

Page 9 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And also, we invited ICANN to have an eventually even more
careful assessment of the impact on ICANN’s structure and on
ICANN’s finances of the IANA transition and the accountability
processes.
Next, please.
However, what we also highlighted is that we are generally
satisfied with the progress that we have seen over the years in
the plan. And we have very much welcomed the fact that the
structure of the plan is the same, or at least it’s been kept the
same for the past three years. So it’s much easier for this
working group, for any stakeholder, to get, to read the plan, and
make comments. Because in the past, this structure of the plan
was changing quite often.
It was also very welcome, the fact that ICANN not only
elaborated on the feedback received on the plan, but also
organized several calls with the different stakeholder groups to
get clarification on some of the points that were expressed by
the different stakeholders. And this is something that was done
immediately after we submitted our comments. So participated
in a couple of calls with ICANN staff to clarify some of the, let’s
say, points we raised in our feedback. And as I said, we very
much welcome this expansion and also availability of ICANN to
have this constituency liaise with specific departments. And that

Page 10 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

is also, again, a good effort made by ICANN to show that there
are processes in place.
Next, please.
What we highlighted, there were some elements that we
highlighted and we wanted to have more, let’s say, information
from ICANN. The first one is the reserve fund. The reserve fund,
there’s been quite a discussion, for those of you who are not part
of the finance mailing list of ICANN. There’s been quite a
discussion lately about the reserve fund and the fact that the
reserve fund has been used quite extensively to cover the
expenses of the IANA transition and the entire accountability
processes. And so this reserve fund is now quite in its low mode,
and there is an effort and an exercise of the ICANN Board to
think how to replenish the fund in the coming weeks. And it is a
process that yesterday Xavier said to us that is expected to be
over in the next couple of months. So it’s going to be in the next
couple of months that the Board of ICANN will decide how to
replenish the fund.
Again, the elements we highlighted in our comment were the
ICANN office and hub strategy, which we will hear about later
today; the staffing and remuneration policy; and some
monitoring tools and indexes. A couple of them are the
Technical Reputation Index and the Domain Market Place Health

Page 11 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Index. And ICANN has referred to them in the Operating Plan and
Budget and stated that they’re still working to refine those
indexes, and especially for the second one. If you read the
feedback of ICANN to the comment of the ccNSO SOP, there is an
indication that ICANN would welcome closer interaction with
this constituency, the ccNSO, to get more details about the
domain name market in the different worldwide regions, to
make sure that this so-called Health Index is a true health index
and contains some benchmarks that can help ICANN staff to
populate the future Operating Plan and Budget with even better
figures.
Next, please.
If we look at the ICANN feedback to the ccNSO Strategy and
Operating Plan Working Group comments, I must say that most
of the responses of the ICANN staff to our comments were okay,
but some of them, they were just going around the answer. So
they were not providing a clear answer to our comments. And
some of them, they were also saying that ICANN committed to
provide certain kind of information again, like the Domain
Market Health Index, in the future, but without a precise
specification when this future is. And as a friend of mine, who’s a
UK lawyer, said to me, “When UK lawyers say, ‘in the future,’ it
could be even 2050.” And that’s not what we want to wait for.

Page 12 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

There is also a commitment of ICANN staff to refine the plan on
the basis of the input provided by the different stakeholder
groups. Now, yesterday, we were informed by Xavier that the
final version of the fiscal year ’17 Operating Plan and Budget has
been approved by the ICANN Board a couple of days ago. And
our remark to Xavier was that we would have appreciated if the
community was presented so that if the consolidated version of
the fiscal year Operating Plan and Budget was published on the
ICANN site before being approved by the Board, not for a second
round of comment, but as a matter to say to the community,
“This is the final version.” As currently on the ICANN site, there is
only commitment to refine the plan. And we have not seen yet
the final version of the plan. And Xavier took this as a good point,
and in the future he said the will try to make sure that the plan is
posted, again not to have a second round of comments, but
again as a matter of saying, “Thank you again for your
comments. This is the final version which we have worked on.”
Next slide, please.
Also during yesterday meeting with Xavier and his team, he
highlighted, himself, as well the need to have internal guidelines
for multiyear project, to make sure that there are precise
benchmarks and precise guidelines to be followed by those
project managers at ICANN that are managing projects that are
running over several years. Because apparently, it’s going to be

Page 13 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

a bit different for them to report on the status of those projects.
And these guidelines have still to be developed by ICANN.
There is also the need to introduce in the plan a better
assessment of risk and opportunities. And there is one element
that has been commented by ICANN staff, which is the balance
between to what extent risk and opportunity should be assessed
against the benefit of assessing so much in-depth risk and
opportunities, as there is also the risk that, by assessing too
much risk and opportunities, at the end any project or some
project may not take off.
And there is one comment that was made by another
constituency, the Registry Stakeholder Group, which is the fact
that there are some expenses listed in the Operating Plan and
Budget. And some of them are probably more important and
valuable for the community than others. And this constituency
has highlighted which expenses are deemed to be more valuable
for the community. And there were some references to expenses
in the work that ICANN is having and is developing in the cybercrime area. And what I did yesterday is to invite this working
group to do the same in the future. It means that we should not
only say, “Okay, this expense is too high,” but we should at some
point say, “We like this expense to be higher than in the past,
because we believe that your work needs more investment, not

Page 14 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

only from an organizational perspective, but also from an
investment/financial resources perspective.”
Next slide, please.
And those are the working group members, which I would like to
thank. And I have to acknowledge their hard work to meet the
deadlines to provide and submit comments to the different
ICANN Operating Plan and Budget Strategy Plan reviews and
much more. Thank you so much. They’ve been always on time.
We divide ourselves in sub-working groups. And then, together
with Bart and the Secretariat, with Kimberly, is helping us to put
up together all the work. We, at the end, submit our final
production to ICANN.
I must say that the cooperation with the ICANN staff has
improved greatly. There is much more interaction and much
more cooperation, and there is a clear intention of ICANN staff,
especially Xavier’s team, to share as much as possible, to show
transparency, to show commitment to the community. So I’m
quite happy of the relation that we have been developing so far
and the status of the relation at this point.
Thank you, and I remain available for any further questions.

Page 15 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

KATRINA SATAKI:

EN

Thank you very much, Giovanni, for this great update. So are
there any questions? Ching?

CHING CHIAO:

Okay, good morning, Giovanni. Maybe just a short question,
because I have number of question marks in my mind. But
excellent work here. And you correctly point out about risk for
the opportunity. The way I see, the risk part could be lying
within. And maybe let’s take one step back, is we have a new
CEO coming in who took the office approximately 1 ½ months.
So do you envision that this plan will go along, will tag along,
with his overall strategy for the organization, let’s say, in the
next 12 months? Or do we have similar comments that say we
categorize this maybe could be a potential risk because of the
new management and this budget is from the past?

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Ching. I think it’s not entirely to me to answer this
question. What I can tell you is that we, as the ccNSO Strategy
and Operating Plan Working Group, we produced a comment
saying that it’s a special year for ICANN because of the IANA
transition, because of the accountability process, and because
of the new CEO. And the response of ICANN has been that there
is a certain level of flexibility in the plan, to accommodate
changes on the [go]. And at the same time, we learned yesterday

Page 16 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

that the plan has been approved, as it has been consolidated by
ICANN staff.
What the main weakness at present I see, and according to what
I read and what I heard from Xavier, is regarding the reserve fund
and the need to get resources to complete the IANA transition
and the accountability process. And those resources currently
are still taken from the reserve. But again, there is a
commitment of the Board to find a way to replenish the fund
and to establish how much should be in the fund to allow ICANN
to cope with the operation expenses for a certain number of
months.
At the same time yesterday, during the talks, we understood
that – and that was thanks to a comment made by [Rolof], was
very much to the point that ICANN is not only having the reserve
fund, but also has other side reserves that, at some point, can be
used. But it’s still up to ICANN do decide how to manage those
reserves. But it’s not that we should only look at the reserve
fund.

CHING CHIAO:

Yeah, with the rapid growth of the TLDs and New gTLD
marketplace, maybe the reserve fund may not be an issue, but
it’s good to point out. Thanks.

Page 17 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Welcome.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you very much. Anymore questions in the audience? If no,
thank you very much, Giovanni.
And now an update from our TLD-OPS.

CHRISTIAN HESSELMAN:

So thank you. So this is an update of the TLD-OPS Working
Group, made by the TLD-OPS Standing Committee.
Next slide, please.
So just a quick summary of what TLD-OPS is. TLD-OPS is the –
sorry – technical incident response community for and by
ccTLDs, as [we log] it. And it basically brings those of us together
who are responsible for the security and stability of their ccTLD.
And our goal is to increase the security and stability of ccTLD
services, as well as of the Internet infrastructure as a whole.
We accomplish this actually in two ways. One is to improve the
reachability of incident response, context of the various ccTLDs,
and also to increase the level of shared knowledge, in terms of
security and stability incidents that might take place at various
ccTLDs or elsewhere.

Page 18 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So it’s important to emphasize that TLD-OPS is open to every
ccTLD. It doesn’t matter if you’re a ccNSO member or not. And
the people who kind of – the oversight body for the community
is the TLD-OPS Standing Committee, which consists of
representatives of the various ccTLDs from the different regions,
plus people from SSAC, IANA, and ICANN’s security team.
Next slide, please.
So the TLD-OPS community basically revolves around the TLDOPS mailing list, which is a very basic incident response facility
in our case. So we use it in two ways. One is as a contact
repository. And this means that we have an automated script
running on the mail server that sends out mail messages every
month that contain the contact information of all subscribers of
the TLD-OPS mailing list. So these are the security and stability
contacts of the various ccTLDs. And the information includes
first name, last name, phone number, and e-mail address. So the
advantage of this approach is that you, as a subscriber, have all
the contact information of your peers in one e-mail. And it even
works in offline situations. So if you’re being DDoS-ed and you
can no longer reach the outside world, you can still check with
your local inbox to look up the contact information of your
peers.

Page 19 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

We’re not using any vetting model, which is typical for the
security industry. But we have adopted a low-entry membership
model, in which your IANA admin contact has to appoint a
certain person as their security and stability contact for the
ccTLD.
The second use of the mailing list is to actually exchange
information on security incidents and can be on basically
anything: attacks, malware. And the goal is to share that
information within a group of trusted peers, which are the
members of the TLD-OPS community. And folks who share that
kind of information need to flag the information with what we
call a TLP protocol, traffic light protocol. So you indicate
whether information can be shared outside of the group or not.
That’s basically what’s it about.
We have a leaflet. The English version is in the packet on your
desk. And since a few weeks, we also have versions in Arabic,
Chinese, French, Russian, Spanish. Ah, it’s in Russian twice.
Okay, next slide, please.
So this is the current TLD-OPS membership status. We have 61%
of all ccTLDs on the planet on the list, so that’s quite good. As
you can see, that’s quite a good score. But there’s still quite a
few ccTLDs missing, in particular from the African region and
also from the LAC region. So we’re working hard to change that.

Page 20 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Next slide, please. Excuse me? I thought there was a question.
Okay. So what did we do since ICANN 55? There were reports for
three security incidents on the list. So one about spear-phishing,
one about a malvertising campaign in the Netherlands, and one
about ransomware that used domain names from various
ccTLDs. We had four new members: San Marino, Vanuatu, Faroe
Islands, and Morocco. And we also noticed that the list is being
actively used by our members, because we regularly receive
requests to update contact information. So this suggests that
the TLD-OPS is being integrated into the operational processes
of the various members.
In terms of outreach, we had the leaflet translated in various
languages. We met with the APTLD manager at the CENTR
Jamboree. At least people from the TLD-OPS Standing
Committee went to the African Internet Summit. And we are
actively engaging with the managers of the Regional
Organizations and the ICANN regional VPs to get more members
on the list. This is a bit of a challenge for the group, because we
have some contacts, of course, with ccTLDs, and we try to get
folks on board individually. But in the end, we very much
depend on the collaboration with the regional organization
managers and also with the ICANN regional VPs.
Okay, next slide, please.

Page 21 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So we set a few targets for this ICANN meeting. The first two are
kind of red, because we didn’t make them. The first goal was to
get 185 members on the list. We got to 178. So it’s an increase,
but not as much as we hoped. And the other thing that didn’t
really materialize yet is the collaboration with ICANN’s security
team. They offered to package security information that they see
from their perspective and share that on the mailing list, also to
stimulate the members to share security incidents that they see
in their respective countries. So this didn’t materialize yet, and
we’re working with the ICANN security team to make this
happen for the next ICANN meeting.
Then we had a goal to set up a simple procedure to update the
contact information of the members. But this turned out not to
be necessary, because it already work. So no need to do
anything there.
And the other thing was to get somebody from the Asia-Pacific
region on the Standing Committee. And that’s Jay Daley from
.nz. So we managed to check that off.
Next slide, please.
So our objectives for ICANN 57, well, at least one of the
important things is to actually grow. So we’re aiming for 187 at
the next ICANN meeting. Of course, like I said, we will need the
help from the community and the Regional Organization

Page 22 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

managers and ICANN regional vice presidents to actually make
that happen.
And we actually want to implement that collaboration with
ICANN security team so we can get that security information that
they promised.
And finally, we’re drafting a TLD-OPS terms of use, which we
found necessary because we had one occasion where people
used the contact information for a purpose that it was not
intended for. Let’s put it that way.
Okay, next slide, please. Oh, that was my last slide. So these are
the folks on the working group that make this work happen. And
if you have any questions, then I’ll be available to answer them.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you very much, Christian. So are there any questions in
the audience? Yes, Hiro, please come to the mic.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Thank you, Christian. I have a question about you told that three
real incidents was reported to the mailing list. And I’d like to
know a little bit more, how the mailing list worked for the
incidents, for example, spear-phishing.

Page 23 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

CHRISTIAN HESSELMAN:

EN

Sorry. It worked, actually, pretty straightforward. The person
that reported this basically flagged the information with the
traffic light protocol code – I think it was red or amber in this
case – and just sent it off. And we don’t have a back channel to
check what happened to this alert, if that’s what you mean. So
it’s informing the members, and they have to then respond to it.
Yeah.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Okay, thank you very much. Do we have more questions in the
audience? If no, then thank you very much, Christian.
And I think we’re moving forward very smoothly. By the way,
please do not forget that, as always, we have our satisfaction
survey sent out after the meeting. So if you liked these particular
presentations, please do not forget to note it in your survey. So
now we are moving to – yeah, the survey also included in the
packet. This time, we decided to have a paper survey as well.
Probably, it will be easier for you to fill in, because we really
need your feedback to improve and to make these presentations
more interesting.
So Bart and Becky, may I ask you to join me here? Now we’re
moving to the next session. It’s PDP and retirement of ccTLDs
and review mechanism for decisions on delegation, revocation,
and retirement of ccTLDs.

Page 24 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Who will start? Okay, Becky will start.

BECKY BURR:

Good morning, everyone. It’s nice that the sun is shining today
and we’re in this room, so maybe later we can open the curtains.
As I’m sure you all recall in painful detail, we have been working
on issues related to delegation, transfer, and revocation of
ccTLDs here for many years. A group of us spent time looking at
IANA’s history of delegations and what we were then calling
redelegations in the Delegation and Redelegation Working
Group, and made a very comprehensive study and identified
some problems and inconsistencies in the way that was
proceeding. The Framework of Interpretation Working Group
followed on and tried to provide clarity, to bring consistencies to
IANA’s application of RFC 1591 in this context.
As part of that process – and this has all been really terrific
progress that I think is going to help us bring some consistency
and predictability to how IANA processes these changes. But
there are two things that we did identify. First of all, RFC 1591
itself articulates or is based on the premise that ccTLD managers
should have a mechanism to appeal delegations/revocations by
IANA and that there should be some mechanism for that to
happen, which, as we all know, doesn’t really exist outside of an
external judicial process.

Page 25 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And the other thing is that there is, RFC 1591 refers to explicitly
and embraces the ISO 3166-1 list as the authoritative source of
ccTLD codes. But it does not address the issue of what happens
when a country code is removed from the ISO 3166-1 list for
when countries change names and the like. And as we know,
that’s happened in several cases. So those were two places
where we identified the need for policy development by the
ccNSO.
In addition, of course, as part of the IANA transition and the
CCWG Accountability work, as a group we looked at the
independent review mechanism and elected, as a group, to say
that the issue of ccTLD delegation, revocation, and transfer
should not be subject to review through an IRP unless and until
the ccNSO develops policy. That’s [inaudible] what the standard
would be, how those rules would be applied, and the like.
So we now find ourselves at the place where the
implementation, the transition is hopefully going to go forward.
And we have these two pieces of policy work to do. So as we
discussed in Marrakesh, we want to start the process by asking
for an Issues Report on retirement of ccTLD codes and on
dispute resolution mechanisms, and appoint an Issues Manager
and sort of kick off the process. So that’s what we’re here to talk
about today.

Page 26 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And, Bart, you’re going to take us through the process.

BART BOSWINKEL:

Yeah, it will be a little bit repetitive of what I presented in
Marrakesh, but includes an update.
Kim, could you put on the next slide, please?
So again, if you look at the policy development process, in
principle you could identify three stages. One is the launch of a
PDP. That includes, as Becky already alluded to, it starts with the
request for an Issue Report, description of issues, assessment of
timelines, etc. So it’s very procedural. And based on that
document, the ccNSO Council needs to decide whether or not to
initiate a ccNSO policy development process. That really kicks it
off. There is some voting, etc., involved and mechanism, but
that’s not relevant at this date.
So then you go into, I would say, stage 2, which is really the
substantive part of a PDP. That’s the development of a policy. It
starts with the interim report. So that needs to be developed
first. Goes out for public comment/inputs, and ends with a final
report.
And then with the final report, then you enter into stage 3, which
is more or less the decision-making phase. And decision-making
phase is first the adoption of the final report by the Council, and

Page 27 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

then comes in probably one of the major differences between
the ccNSO and other organization. Then there is a ccNSO
members vote. And if the ccNSO members adopt the
recommendations in the final report, then it will be submitted to
the ICANN Board of Directors by the ccNSO Council.
Next slide, please.
So characteristics of a PDP, if you drill down a little bit more, the
duration of every PDP and policy development process – and we
do have limited experience, fortunately – it’s set almost by stage
2, so the development of the policy. It includes, at a minimum,
two rounds of public comment. It kicks off with a public
comment on the Issue Report and then on the interim report.
And most of the time, it’s also on a draft final report. And every
public comment period is, in principle, at least 40 days. It could
be longer. And that was one of the experiences with the FOI.
Although not a policy development process as defined, it really
worked out well to provide plenty of time to the community to
go through it, be aware of what’s in it, etc. Then if you look what
will happen during that second stage, so it’s the analysis of the
issue, development of recommendation. And my minimal and
very, very optimistic assessment is that it will take at least six
months.

Page 28 of 95

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

Then you go into the third stage, which includes the members’
vote. And again, that will take, yeah, I would say two months.
And then we hit one of the real issues there. And that’s what
we’ve seen with the IDN PDP, is there is a quorum rule that at
least 80 members currently need to vote. It doesn’t matter how
they

vote,

but

at

least

80

members

vote

on

the

recommendation. Then if the majority votes in favor of the
recommendation, then it’s adopted. So last time, with the IDN
PDP, we needed to have two rounds of vote because the first
round, we just missed the threshold.
Next slide, please.
So as you may recall from the Marrakesh meeting, we presented
to you effectively two methods to deal with these two topics, the
review mechanism and the retirement of ccTLDs. The first
method is to initiate a single PDP. So that would mean, because
I think we have the experience of working groups, not with
taskforce, that would mean chartering two groups: one dealing
with the review mechanism and the other one dealing with the
retirement, so Working Group 1, Working Group 2. And what is
very important to understand is if the Council and the
community opts for one single PDP, the total package – so the
output of Working Group 1 and 2, so both on the review
mechanism and on the retirement – is subject to the members’
vote. So that’s the end of the process.

Page 29 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So next slide, please.
So the second method is initiate two PDPs, one on the review
mechanisms. And at the end of that stage, there will be a
members’ vote on the policy itself, and then initiate at one point.
And you can play around a little bit when you want to initiate it.
But then start and kick off the second PDP on the retirement of
ccTLDs, and then you have a second members’ vote at the end of
PDP. It’s very important to understand that you would first have
a vote on the review mechanism, and then later on, on the
retirement.
Next slide, please.
So based on the discussions in Marrakesh, and that was the way
Becky and I – what we took from the room is, first of all, that the
review mechanism on decisions relating to delegation,
revocation, transfer has the highest priority. You, the ccTLD
community present at Marrakesh, would like to start off and kick
off that process first. Secondly, the preference is one PDP. Again,
so going back to the single model. But that didn’t have as much
support at the time as, say, the review mechanism and the
highest priority. And then thirdly, that was a suggestion, do as
much in parallel as possible in order to speed this process up as
much as possible.
Next slide, please.

Page 30 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So what will happen here in Helsinki? And that’s why we’re back
with you on this topic. As Becky already said, at this meeting, the
Council intends to launch the PDP, a PDP, one PDP. And the
Helsinki Council decisions will be the request for an Issue Report
to be published before the Hyderabad meeting, so somewhere
early October, so the community has plenty of time to look at
the Issues Report. And one of the major questions in the Issues
Report, and that you will see in the Council resolution, is
whether or not to initiate one or two PDPs. Because we’ve done
some mapping, etc., and timing, and we need your feedback as
well on whether one or two.
The second thing is in preparing the Issue Report, we’ll be
guided by – and I think, again, this is to reiterate what Becky just
said – the Delegation/Redelegation Working Group final report
on retirement of ccTLDs. This was a report of the 7th of March,
2011. And the main recommendation of that report was that at
some point in time, the ccNSO needs to launch and initiate a
PDP on the retirement of ccTLDs.
The second major document to be looked at and to guide the
Issue Report is the ccNSO Framework of Interpretation, RFC
1591, and then the ISO 3166 Standard, because there are some
rules which are in this standard, which are probably very, very
relevant with respect to the retirement of ccTLD, and to really
understand what it means with ISO code. And as Becky already

Page 31 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

said, people forget sometimes this standard, or the list of
ccTLDs, is not static. It changes over time. And then finally, the
CWG Stewardship final report, Annex O, and that’s the survey
among the ccTLD managers on whether or not to include a
review mechanism in the stewardship proposal. And the
Accountability Working Group build on that one as well.
So that’s probably the most substantive part of what will be
discussed by Council on Thursday. The second point is
appointment of issue manage that’s driving the process. And
then the third one is – and that’s again to avoid that an issue
manager works in isolation, especially during the first phase, is
the appointment of an Oversight Committee of six councilors,
one from every region. So the ccNSO members appointed
councilors, and one NomCom appointee.
Next slide, please.
So this is where we’re at right now, and then I will hand it over to
Becky again. These are my words for some of the concerns I’ve
noticed with councilors. First, there is a concern within Council
on the availability of community members and the workload for
the community if we kick off the policy development process.
Based on experience, it’s going to be a very intense period. And
it’s very clear we have some other major projects on our plate

Page 32 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

right now, or the community has some major projects on their
plate right now.
And then the second one – and this really drives the decision
around the one or two PDPs – is when is the review mechanism
needed? If you want it to happen quickly, if you want to have a
review mechanism available quickly, then you want to go for
one PDP or two PDPs, because the members’ vote, as I said,
determines the time when the PDP is closing. And then it’s
submitted to the Board, and there is implementation work. If
there is one PDP, you have to wait until the policy around the
retirement of ccTLDs is completed.
So, Becky, back to you.

BECKY BURR:

So just to reiterate that last point, we can launch the Issues
Report without making a determination about whether we want
to do one or two at this point. So we could use the Issue Report
that comes out of this if we decided we wanted to focus first on a
review mechanism and getting that closed off as quickly as
possible, and then use the same Issues Report for a second PDP
and move that along. But my understanding is we don’t need to
make that call right now. We can do that in Hyderabad with the
benefit of the Issues Report. So obviously, this is something
that’s very important and, like all things related to RFC 1591,

Page 33 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

pretty complicated. And yet it is sort of crucial to this
community.
So at this point, I think we should open it up for a discussion.
The Council does have a draft resolution that calls for
development of an Issues Report and appointment of an Issues
Manager that we’ll be talking about on Thursday. And I see Dr.
Lissa. They’re not censoring you, I’m sure.

EBERHARD LISSA:

There we go. Good morning. I was on the – what was it – the first
one, DRDG, whatever it was –

BECKY BURR:

Delegation/Redelegation Working Group.

EBERHARD LISSA:

Delegation/Redelegation and the Framework of Interpretation
Working Group. I think we should have two PDPs. There is no
need for speed. We have done without these mechanisms for
about – how many years? Well, in my case since 1991. That’s 25
years. There is no need to rush things. We have all the time to
deliberate carefully, like we did in those working groups. And if
we take one first, I also would prefer the review mechanism.

Page 34 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

On the other hand, we have currently .an facing redelegation
while they are still active domain, even if only 20. And IANA is
being stubborn. They’re not listening, really. So I don’t know
which one we should do first. I think we should have two.

BECKY BURR:

Thank you. And let me just say, I have to agree that, obviously,
we have to take our time. But I have to agree with Bart that the
notion that this would be a six-month process was
extraordinarily optimistic.

DANKO JEVTOVIĆ:

Having experience with former Yugoslavia and these processes, I
would just like to support this process. But I think due to the
workload for other people, maybe it’s a challenge to have it in
parallel. So I also think this is something very important and
maybe not so urgent. So Council should rethink how the people
can be involved in this. And maybe it is difficult to find both
people for both processes in the same time, so some of the
people might be in both groups. So, thank you.

BECKY BURR:

Page 35 of 95

Thank you. Other comments or questions?

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So as I said, I think this question about one PDP versus two, we
do not have to decide while we are here. We’ll get an issues
report on both of the topics, and then we will be able to discuss
that. And people will have assessed workload. Hopefully we will
be a little further along in some of the Work Stream 2 and
transition issues, which may free up some resources from
among the folks here.

BART BOSWINKEL:

Any other questions, comments? We have plenty of time?

BECKY BURR:

You guys haven’t had enough coffee yet this morning,
apparently.

BART BOSWINKEL:

No? That’s good.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Well, just a quick question then. Who in the audience would be
willing to participate in this work? How many volunteers can
we…

BECKY BURR:

Page 36 of 95

It looks like at least one from each region.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

KATRINA SATAKI:

Okay. All right. That’s encouraging.

BART BOSWINKEL:

Yeah.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Yeah. Okay, so thank you very much. Well, I’m glad to see that
Elise is already here, because apparently we finished half an
hour earlier than expected. So, Elise, please join us here. Thank
you very much, Bart and Becky.
You will never, ever get so much time next time.
Okay, so we’ll continue with IANA update. And you have an hour.

ELISE GERICH:

Do I get to sing and dance too?

KATRINA SATAKI:

Yes.

ELISE GERICH:

Well, good morning, and I’m glad I was able to be here on time.
Otherwise, you might have had a much longer coffee break. I’m

Page 37 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

so sorry. So do I drive this myself? Oh, I’m sorry. I just wanted to
know.
Anyway, my name is Elise Gerich, and I’m here to give the IANA
functions update. And we have five topics on the agenda. One, I
wanted to remind everyone about the performance KPIs that
were set about four years ago, when we did a public
consultation. And we’ve been reporting on them regularly. So
just kind of to refresh your memories and give you an update.
Talk about the monthly Root Zone Data Report that we publish
and that we made some changes to in April. And I’m not sure if
you realized we made the changes, so I wanted to bring it to
your attention.
Finally, there’s some parallel operations testing that’s been
happening that has to do with the IANA stewardship transition.
And just to point that out, in case you were unaware of it, it has
to do with the Root Zone Management System. We’ve completed
the third-party audits for last year, and they’ve been published,
so I’ll give you an update on that. And finally, staffing, we have
some new staff. So I wanted to make sure you knew who you
might be receiving e-mail from, if their names seem unfamiliar.
Next slide. I turned off my mic, instead. Okay, you can go to the
next one, please.

Page 38 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So you’ll see two slides now. One of them, many years ago – like
four – we did a public consultation. And you all came up with
these KPIs, key performance indicators, for what we should be
doing if we had root zone file and WHOIS database change
requests. There were metrics: timeliness and accuracy. As you
can see, the targets that were set was, for timeliness, 80% of the
time we had to complete a data change within 21 days. So that’s
into the WHOIS database, the IANA WHOIS database. And then
for accuracy, we had to hit 100% of the time.
This is just a snapshot from the report for May 2016. If you go to
the iana.org/performance website, it’ll show you all the monthly
reports that started in 2013 through this month’s report. I think
on this report, we’ve hit our targets all 100% of the time. But
unfortunately, on the plane my laptop didn’t work, so I didn’t
get to do the data analysis and show a pretty graph. But if you’d
like to go back and see all the reports, they’re there.
Next slide. Thank you.
The other key performance indicator that we came up with, with
you all, through the public consultation process was for
delegation and redelegation of ccTLDs. And as you can see, the
timeliness was set at a target of 50% done within 120 days. I
know when we did the public consultation, there was a lot of
comment at that time that sometimes it can take as long as a

Page 39 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

year, and sometimes it can take even longer, to do a
redelegation or a delegation. So the 120 days was kind of an
aggressive target. And sometimes we hit it 100% of the time, and
sometimes we don’t. But the accuracy is also 100%. So this
again is a report from May 2016. And you can find all the reports,
starting in 2013, on the website iana.org/performance.
So next slide, please.
So those key performance indicators are key performance
indicators that we’ve been collecting for the last several years.
As part of the IANA stewardship transition, the CWG, which
included membership from ccTLDs, defined some new Service
Level Expectations. And these are things that we’ll be collecting
data on and reporting on in the future.
So starting in March, we had completed the instrumentation to
the Root Zone Management System that would allow us to
collect the data and the measurements that were defined by the
CWG in its Service Level Expectations. And right now, we’re in
the process of developing a real-time dashboard so that we can
present that information to you all in a more digestible way,
instead of just huge logs’ worth of data measurements. And we
expect that the dashboard will be available at prototype for
review by the CWG and others, sometime in mid-July, at which
point my understanding is that there’ll be a discussion to set

Page 40 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Service Level Agreements from the Service Level Expectations.
So the data we’re collecting right now is really setting a baseline
so that we know what the timelines and the measures are that
we’ve been seeing. And then we can set reasonable targets,
based on that information.
Next slide. Thank you.
So next, I’d just like to mention the Root Zone Data Reports, in
case you’re unaware of those.
Next slide.
So we’ve been publishing what I call the Root Zone Data Reports
since September 2013. Again, these are on the same page,
iana.org/performance. And it identifies each change that’s been
made to the root zone file and the root zone database that were
completed within a month. So any change that happened within
the month of May 2016 is in that report that’s posted most
recently. And as of April 2016, these reports also include pending
delegation and redelegation requests. That was not originally in
these reports, and we started publishing that in April.
Next slide, please.
So this is a snapshot of the report that was published in June. It
obviously has a much longer list of pending things, and there are
some ccTLDs at the bottom of this list. Most of them that are the

Page 41 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

bottom of the list that are ccTLDs are IDN ccTLDs. And then
there’s a comparable list that’s for redelegations. So every
month, we publish the list not only of things completed within
the month for the root zone file updates, but also things that are
pending, that are in process and haven’t been completed within
the month.
Next slide, please.
And parallel operations results. Please move ahead to the next
slide.
So the post-NTIA stewardship proposal defines an elimination of
NTIA’s role to authorize all changes to the root zone file. So if
you’re familiar – and I’m sure everyone in this room is – with the
process when you submit a root zone file change request to the
IANA department, we make sure it meets all the criteria. Then we
send it to NTIA. NTIA says, “Okay, yes, you’ve followed your
process properly.” And then NTIA tells Verisign, “Okay, now you
can put it in the root zone and distribute it.” So that role of NTIA
between the IANA department and Verisign is going away.
In order to make sure that there would be a smooth transition,
in the hopes and the expectations that there will be a transition,
we put up a parallel system. Verisign and ICANN together have
two parallel threads running so that one thread goes to Verisign
the normal way, through NTIA with its approval, and then the

Page 42 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

other parallel process does not have the NTIA approval in it. And
at the end of the month, we compare – actually, daily we
compare the root zone file at the end of the day to make sure,
through both processes, that the root zone file that’s created is
identical.
So as of April 6, ICANN and Verisign began this testing process.
And it’s a 90-day testing process to verify the continuity and the
integrity of the data in the root zone file. And we publish reports
on that.
If you can go to the next slide, please?
So there’s a webpage – and I’ve put the long link there, so I won’t
bother reading it – that shows where all the details about the
parallel testing are, the description of it, as well as the two
monthly reports. Since we started in April, we have and April and
May report are posted. And then finally, Verisign has put up a
page where they show the daily comparisons between the two
root zone files. So this is information for you, if you were
unaware of it, but to let you know that we’re doing our due
diligence to make sure, when and if the transition takes place,
that we have a Root Zone Management System in place so that it
can continue without the authorization function of NTIA.
Next slide, please.

Page 43 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Okay, part of our annual agreement is to do third-party audits of
our systems. And if you can go to the next slide?
So we have completed the two third-party audits that we do
every year. One is called a SOC3. That’s a Service Organization
Control audit of the KSK system. That’s the key-signing system.
And this is the sixth year that we’ve completed that. And we’ve
posted the certificate from PricewaterhouseCoopers, who’s the
third-party auditor, on our website. And for the last three years,
we’ve done an additional audit. And this one is for the IANA
Registry Maintenance System, the RZMS system. And we had no
exceptions. This is a SOC2.
There’s a difference between SOC3. Sorry to use that jargon, but
that’s the way the auditors call it, SOC2 and SOC3. SOC3 is kind
of a pass/fail. Basically, they just say “You did good,” or they
don’t’ tell you anything. So the fact that we’ve gotten
acceptance for the SOC3 for six years means that we’ve done
well and we passed. We didn’t fail. And then the SOC2 is a big,
long report that the auditors provide to ICANN. And this tells us
areas where we can see, even though we’ve done well and
there’s no exceptions, that we can maybe find places where we
want to make improvements. It doesn’t mean that things are
bad. It just means we get more information. So these audits are
conducted annually, and you can find them posted on this link.

Page 44 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Next slide, please.
Staffing. So this brings me to my next-to-last slide. If you go to
the next slide?
So it’s a little pictorial of everyone in our department. I’m the
one that says, “Elise.” That’s me. And I’m the VP of the
department. Then you know Kim Davies. He’s been here
regularly for many, many years, and he leads our Technical
Services department. Working for Kim are Andres and Punky and
Ali. And Punky, that’s his nickname. He prefers to go by it. But
Andres and Punky are the cryptographic key managers in the
department and so they take care of all the KSK key ceremonies.
Ali is a software developer. He’s actually in the IT department,
but we’ve adopted him because he’s completely dedicated to
working on our systems and our registry systems, and all the
tools that we use.
Then Naela Sarras, who’s next to Kim, she manages the team
that handles all the processing of the requests. And her team
includes Sabrina, Amanda, Selina, and Paula. They are IANA
specialists, and you may interact with them if you’ve sent in
requests. So Sabrina, Amanda, Selina, and Paula really handle
all the processing and the requests.
Then Marilia Hirano, she’s our Continuous Improvement
Manager. She manages our audits and also our continuity and

Page 45 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

contingency planning. So when we do rollover plans or tabletop
exercises, Marilia is in charge of that. She also sends out the
customer survey every year. So if you’ve received any of ICANN’s
IANA department customer service surveys, it’s Marilia who is
responsible for that. And Shaunte, who’s below her in this photo,
reports to Marilia. And she’s our audit associate. She’s the
person who does all the legwork for the audits, collecting the
samples and the data and everything to share with the thirdparty auditors.
And then finally, Jennifer, on the bottom row, she’s our
administrative assistant. And she supports us, and we really
need that support. We are thankful that she’s there.
So Michelle Cotton, on the top row, is our IANA Engagement
Manager with the IETF. And she manages all of the protocol
parameter engagement. And that means attending three IETF
meetings a year, staffing an IANA support desk at the IETF
meetings, reading all the RFCs that have IANA considerations,
and taking care of that aspect of things for the IETF protocol
parameter function.
So this is the IANA department staff, and I thought some of those
names and faces might be new to you and that this might be a
good opportunity to introduce them. And that’s the end of my
presentation.

Page 46 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Next slide.
Thank you, and I’ll take questions, if you have any.

KATRINA SATAKI:

No, no, not yet. Not yet. We have a question from Ching.

CHING CHIAO:

Thanks for the presentation. Just out of my curiosity, and
probably many people here in the room will be interested to
know, who is the talented person managing the IDN tables?

ELISE GERICH:

So the IDN tables are the code and the RFC that’s been written,
is Kim Davies. Okay. Oh, good, I’ll share that with him. Thank
you.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you. Are there any more questions? We still have 40
minutes until coffee break.

ELISE GERICH:

Time for a song and dance? Just kidding.

KATRINA SATAKI:

We have a question here. Take your time.

Page 47 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

ELISE GERICH:

EN

You have 40 minutes to get to the microphone.
Don’t rush, now.

JAY DALEY:

Thank you, Elise. In Marrakesh, we had a conversation about the
assumptions of privacy around how long a particular TLD’s
request takes to go through. I, and a number of the other
Registry Operators – this is from the gTLD space – who had been
involved in the SLE discussions had assumed that there would
be no issue about saying that this request for this particular TLD
took this long, this request for that TLD took that long, and
things. And we felt that was important, because it would enable
transparency about whether or not different regions have
different processing speeds that may then indicate problems
with language or other things within particular regions. It’s not
that IANA treats regions differently. And that assumption came
against the assumption from within ICANN that that stuff ought
to be private, that you could show a request took this time, but
not who the TLD was, because there was an assumption that
TLDs would want that private.
When is a process going to start to consult about that, and to
find out which of those assumptions is correct and whether we

Page 48 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

can remove that privacy so that we can see that data openly
about provisioning?

ELISE GERICH:

So I think I would characterize our conversation in Marrakesh
slightly differently, because I thought there was conclusion from
the people in the room that the aggregate data, without
identification of individual TLDs, was the intent of the report,
and that there were different perceptions by some of the
authors of the report and it wasn’t within the report. But I
thought Lise and Jonathan had said that their expectation was
that it was the aggregates. But that’s beside the point.
And so the question is, when can we raise the discussion about
whether or not that information of individual TLDs – for
instance, say .nz took two years to make a root zone change for
some reason. And it would show that the IANA department spent
two days on it, and .nz used a year and a half. That’s a bad
example, of course. And if the community would support having
every one of their TLDs identified like that and showing that
there’s IANA time – I’ll call it that – and then there’s TLD time,
and then there’s potentially, I don’t know, Verisign time, say.
So that discussion, I think, could happen at any time, say, within
the ccTLDs. The gTLDs have more contractual relationship. So

Page 49 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

some of that information is contractual in the SLAs there. Did I
answer your question at all?

JAY DALEY:

Sort of. I think I’m trying to make you responsible for something
here.

ELISE GERICH:

Oh, okay. All right.

JAY DALEY:

I think that in IANA should begin a process of consultation,
across CCs and Gs, about this. I think that what you talked
about, about the contracts in the Gs, is only there because of this
underlying assumption. And so it’s not there because it’s been
thought through and people have agreed it should be there. It’s
just somebody wrote it in, thinking that’s what’s needed. And so
I think an overall consultation from IANA, which tries to avoid a
differentiation between Cs and Gs, and just talks about TLDs and
privacy expectations, or not privacy expectations, would be very
useful here.
And I’d prefer also that it [worked] on the default of open data
and said, “IANA is in favor of open data. We believe it should be
published like this, this, and this. Who objects, and why do they

Page 50 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

object?” And ask those who want it to be made private give good
reasons about it. I think that would be a very useful step for us
getting a framework underneath privacy within IANA database,
or within the transaction database.

ELISE GERICH:

So I see it’s different. It’s an ask, versus just a question. And I
think that’s actually a good idea. However, I would like to wait
until we find out if this transition goes through or not, mostly
because anything that I ask right now would then come under
the purview of NTIA. And according to the contract at this point
in time, I would have to consult with them before I could consult
with you to make changes to what we do.

JAY DALEY:

Okay. Can you –

ELISE GERICH:

Because there is explicit language in the contract today about
confidentiality of data that we receive from you and send to
them.

JAY DALEY:

Right, okay. That makes sense. Is it possible to start an
equivalent of a Work Stream 2 process, where you say, “We’re

Page 51 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

not talking about anything now, but future, when this happens,
this is the consultation about that,” so that we can at least begin
that conversation?

ELISE GERICH:

It’s kind of a question of what’s most important to you to start
right now, because the transition has put a lot of changes in
place, or will be putting a lot of changes in place. So we have a
lot of moving parts. Is this something that we should start now
and delay some of the other things? Or is this something that
could wait ‘til September or October?

JAY DALEY:

It can wait. I think it will be nice to see a plan of all of those
things so that we then are listened to when we’re asking things
like this, what impact that would have.

ELISE GERICH:

So hopefully, I know there is going to be an implementation of
the IANA stewardship transition here, an Implementation Plan.
That has a lot of the moving parts that I’m talking about,
because most of the moving parts do impact the IANA
department. And we’re engaged in a lot of the implementation
things, like the parallel testing and other things of that nature.
We also have on our plate the Framework of Interpretation

Page 52 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

changes, which have made little progress to date, except for
retiring ICP 1, is it, or 2? I’m sorry, whichever ICP it was, it’s
retired.

JAY DALEY:

Good, because it’s rude [inaudible] that one.

ELISE GERICH:

Yeah. Sorry. But it’s retired. It’s gone, or archived, or whatever
the right thing is.

JAY DALEY:

Never existed is the [crosstalk] –

ELISE GERICH:

Okay, I’ll take it out of my vocabulary.

JAY DALEY:

Okay, that’s great. So that plan shows the impacts on IANA
clearly, so we can then understand.

ELISE GERICH:

It doesn’t relate directly to the IANA department, but it shows
you all the projects that are in flight at this point in time, and
we’re engaged in those projects.

Page 53 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

JAY DALEY:

EN

Okay. So there’s no easy way to extract the IANA impact timeline
from that?

ELISE GERICH:

Well, the IANA impact is obviously the deadline would be
September 30th. Between now and then, we’re very engaged.

JAY DALEY:

Okay. So it’s just one plan, one thing, September 30th. Okay,
great. Thank you, Elise.

ELISE GERICH:

Okay. Thanks for the suggestion, and we definitely will follow
up.

JAY DALEY:

Okay, thank you.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Thank you very much. Nigel?

Page 54 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

NIGEL ROBERTS:

EN

Hi, this is just a follow-on from the last conversation in regard to
Framework of Interpretation. Sorry? I’m not blaming anybody,
Garth.
I’m going to ask, how can we help you? Because basically, I’ve
said this for many years. I don’t it needs implementing. It simply
needs to be held up that whenever you make a decision, you
refer to that as the authoritative source of any interpretation,
whether it’s a question of how do you… I do know there’s an
outstanding question. I think it’s the outstanding question that
Garth – Garth was here yesterday. Sorry, Bart. And I’m very
happy to assist in any work that might need to be done on that.
But how can we help you?

ELISE GERICH:

So I think you just volunteered. And Bart’s probably going to talk
to you about it. There’s one piece of the Framework of
Interpretation that needs implementation that has to do with
the sponsoring organization or managing organization. But it’s a
way of identifying –

NIGEL ROBERTS:

Page 55 of 95

This is what you’re saying? You’re –

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

ELISE GERICH:

Yes. Yes.

NIGEL ROBERTS:

Right, okay.

ELISE GERICH:

And in order to make the kinds of changes to the Root Zone
Management System and all the e-mail messages that come out
and everything, we need to understand how that’s supposed to
work so that we don’t have to redo work over and over again.

NIGEL ROBERTS:

Okay.

ELISE GERICH:

And so that’s the one open question, and then we can try and
move forward with a plan and timelines, etc.
And Bart has just volunteered that it’s on his plate, and please
talk to Bart.
Do we have any other questions, or anyone volunteer to sing a
song or do a little dance? Okay. Well then, I think that’s all I have
for the IANA functions update. Thank you for your attention.

Page 56 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

KATRINA SATAKI:

EN

Thank you very much, Elise. And with that, we have 45 minutes
for a coffee break. 45 minutes. Yeah, we reconvene at 10:45 for
the ccTLD news session, chaired by Hiro Hotta. And, well, expect
to see all of you back.
Dear colleagues, if you need an invitation to the ccNSO cocktail
tonight, you are welcome without any invitations. But
invitations have address, time, and a nice small map on the
back. So please come to Kim and get your copy.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

So there are presenters in the ccTLD news session, please come
to the front. Do we have Juhani? And all right. And Dmitry and
Andrew and Freddy. Yeah, please come to the front. Yes, I think
you turn on the – okay.
All right, now it’s time start our popular ccTLD news session. So
today we have four presenters from .fi, .ua, .vu, and .id. So first
presenter will be Juhani, Juhani Juselius. Okay, please.

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Well, thank you, Hiro, and it’s nice to see you again. This time, I
didn’t have to run here, so I was ready on the spot.
Okay, so this year it’s really interesting for .fi because we are
hosting this ICANN meeting. But it’s not the topic that I would

Page 57 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

like to now have a presentation about. This year, it’s about the
big changes for the .fi registry. And there’s one big change and,
well, one minor one. And I will just start with the minor one.
Yeah.
So .fi, it’s operated by Finnish Communications Regulatory
Authority. And we just had a minor change in our organization.
And those registry operations functions, they were moved to
under our National Cyber Security Centre. Actually, it’s just
another department within FICORA, so it’s not basically a big
change. But I hope it enables us to cooperate more closely with
other security functions within FICORA. In this change, customer
service functions were separated from other functions. They’re
under a different department nowadays. But those people are
still sitting physically next to us, so it was not a big change. And
yesterday, three person from the customer service were just
helping us at our booth. You might have met with them
yesterday.
Well, but the big change, it’s about many things. It’s kind of a
bunch of mini-changes that were bundled together. And why we
bundled them together, actually the reason is, I would say, the
law, because quite many of these things are written in the law or
in the regulation. And we just decided to have a big change,
instead of many smaller ones, because changing the law, it’s

Page 58 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

quite a difficult project always. Now we just handle one change
and that’s it.
And the reason why we’re having all these changes, actually,
there are two reasons. First, we just our current processes were
planned and implemented in 2003, when we had 80,000 domain
names. And nowadays, we are having almost 400,000. So those
processes that we implemented in 2003, so 13 years ago, they
are just not suitable anymore for our operations. So we have to
change our operational model.
And the second goal or reason for this change, it’s the changing
domain name industry. So to some extent, it’s getting more
commercialized. And we can’t stay in that comfort zone we used
to be, so we have to change as well and give up all those
national restrictions we are still having.
But the biggest change is about to move to registry-registrar
model, because currently we serve both direct customers and
registrars. And we are now getting rid of those direct customers.
So we are going to have very simple accreditation process. And
basically, all the new registrars should have to do is to respect
Finnish law and regulation. And I expect that we’re going to have
about 3,000 registrars. It’s the current number, and I see no
difference in our new operational model.

Page 59 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And the second big change, it will be the local presence
requirement that was are now having at the moment. So we are
going to get rid of that requirement as well. So in the future,
anyone, anywhere can have a domain name. So even Hiro can
have a .fi domain name if he would like to have one. I guess you
want? Yeah, it’s a big change for us, because currently this local
presence requirement is really strict. So you have to be a Finnish
company or a Finnish association or public [inaudible] or Finnish
private person. And so we are going to get rid of all those
requirements.
And we are currently having an age limit for private persons of
15 years. So if you are younger, you cannot have .fi domain
name. So I think we are currently the only “not suitable for
children” ccTLD. So we are going to get rid of that requirement
as well. So if you have children, you can buy .fi domain names
for Christmas present, for example, for them.
We are going to allow domain parking. So at the moment, we
require name servers, but we are going to get rid of that
requirement as well.
I had a very good question yesterday, why we are going to allow
domaining. And I see no reason why we shouldn’t allow it,
because we have done marketing for 12, 13 years now. And we
have try to find customers as hard we can, customers who really

Page 60 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

use the domain names. And if domainers will succeed better in
this kind of marketing, if they find customers to us, I would just
be happy. In this change, actually, we are going to allow
domaining, especially in the way that at the moment it’s
illegalized. If you buy a domain name, you basically have to use
it by yourself. You can sell it if it becomes obsolete, but you
cannot register .fi domain name at the moment in purpose to
resell it later. And that will be legalized.
At the moment, we are having kind of blacklist of names that
cannot be registered. And actually, this blacklist contains three
different categories. One is the name of other TLDs, like com.fi or
eu.fi. But those names will be released, because it’s obsolete or
very old technical reason why we block them. And it’s not valid
anymore, that reason. And the second category that will be
released for registration that are names that express the form of
a corporate, like limited.fi. And the third category are words that
are offensive or words that might provoke someone to commit a
crime. It’s a list that we have invented by ourselves. And we
don’t want to be a censor anymore, so we are going to get rid of
that list as well. So we are going to open these names for
registrations, actually, September 7th. So we want to protect our
system from those domainers and implement these changes in
two steps.

Page 61 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And currently, those personal names – I mean the combination
of first and last names – they are protected. So only person with
that name can have the domain name. But this restriction will be
removed, and mainly because foreign registrants, they cannot
know what names are Finnish first and last names. So it’s just for
their protection.
And from technical point of view, we are going to replace our
current web service based interface with EPP. And we are trying
to keep it as standard as possible. We are implementing registry
lock at the same time, and two-factor authentication as well.
Because it’s a big change, so we are getting foreign registrants a
lot, is my best guess. So we are getting new tools also to improve
the security. And one very interesting tool is that in case of
serious or suspicion of IT-related security or criminal action, we
can monitor the traffic, we can change DNS settings, and we can
even suspend the domain by our own decision. But of course, all
these decisions can be appealed to the court if the registrants
prefers to do that afterwards.
And we’re also getting more simplified process to revoke a
domain name if there’s an obvious trademark or company name
violation. And in case of typosquatters, well, the world will be
more much difficult. So we are getting more simplified process
to transfer those names away from typosquatters, as well.

Page 62 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

And as we are giving more power to registrars, we want to make
sure that their operations are secure, so we are setting new
security-related requirements to them. They are based on the
regulation we are giving. So there are some special security
requirement for every registrar. And especially those who are
using EPP interface, our requirements will be much, much
deeper. And we are going to have right to audit this requirement.
So we can walk to registrar, cannot [bar door] if we want to
check that they are really following our requirements.
I think I just went through the big change package we are going
to have, so it will really change our operational mode. And if you
have any questions, please have them.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Thank you, Juhani. Questions? Yes? Irina first.

IRINA DANELIA:

Thank you, Juhani. And I am really happy that now I’m able to
register .fi domain name for myself and for my younger
daughter. But altogether, it looks like a very big change in your
approach. So could you explain a little bit about the reasons and
how you came to these decisions? Because it’s not easy
decision, actually.

Page 63 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

EN

Okay. So I think this domain name industry, it’s changed. Those
New gTLDs, they are increasing competition. And we have not
seen it yet, but we will. And these are just measures to protect
our current position in Finland. So I believe that more registrars
are getting more power to choose the TLDs they want to operate
with. And with our national, those restrictions, they are not so
willing to do. So this is a way to make our cooperation with
registrars much easier, and they might choose us when they are
selling those domains to customers.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible] from NIC Chile. How many direct customers do you
still have, and how do you plan to migrate them to registrars?

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Actually, in the beginning of this process, we had about 20
persons or domains registered directly from us. So it was not
that big amount. And those who had registrar, it was not a
problem. So we knew the registrar. But those 20 persons, we
have contacted them directly by e-mail so far. No, I don’t think
we are going to send traditional mail to them. But we have
informed them in many ways, and this e-mail was the last effort.
And this number of our customers, it’s getting down all the time.
So we are approaching zero before the September 5th.

Page 64 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

SEBASTIEN PENSIS:

EN

Good morning, Juhani. Thank you very much. I just had a quick
question about the opening up of the domain name
registrations. I was wondering, will you be keeping a list of
reserved domain names put aside? And would you establish a
sort of reserve names activation procedure for certain protected
names?

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Well, the simple answer is that, no, we are not going to have that
kind of list anymore. So all domains are free for registration, on
first come, first served basis. So if you want to have eu.fi, you
must hurry.

THOMAS MACKUS:

Juhani, I want to ask about disputes and resolution. Is it FICORA
which is working on dispute resolution? Or courts? Or you have
some other institution?

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Actually, yes, we are handling those dispute cases by ourself. So
we are the first level in dispute resolution. Of course, all
decisions can be appealed to the higher court levels afterwards,
but there will be no change. So in the future, we will handle

Page 65 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

disputes as well. And currently, our process, it’s quite
complicated that before we can implement our decision, we
have to be sure that the registrant has received our decision,
whatever it is. And when we are going to have much more
foreign registrants, so there is no way anymore that we can be
sure that this registrant really receives our decision. And
actually, this new law allows us just to send one-way e-mail to
registrants. It doesn’t matter if their e-mail address is correct or
not. It’s just enough that we send a decision to registrants, and
we can just implement our decision after that.

THOMAS MACKUS:

Thank you.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Thank you. Some more? Okay.

EDUARDO SANTOYO:

Thank you. Hi, Juhani. Juhani, question. You said that probably
you are going to do monitoring content. Are you allowed by law
to do that?

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

No, actually. I think we are just going to monitor not the content,
but those DNS [inquiries], DNS traffic.

Page 66 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

EDUARDO SANTOYO:

Okay, thank you.

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

You’re welcome.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

All right. Thank you, Juhani.

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Thank you.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Okay, the next presentation will be done by Dmitry Kohmanyuk.

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Thanks. Apologies for the lack of graphics, although I prefer to
have simpler things. It’s titled “New from .ua.” Well, now that I
heard the Finnish presentation, I would probably like to add
some comments. But it’s a long road, and we have been there.
So good luck. Not everything will probably work as you
expected. And if I can give you one advice, that please consider
having a third-party resolution process beside the court,
because it would really remove the liability from you as a
registry. It maybe not a concern by law, but still it would allow

Page 67 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

you to be a neutral party, especially when you do the transition.
Because after you’ve done the transition, actually it’s okay,
because then your registrars are doing that. But in the
meantime.
So anyway, well, we have been an independent country since
’91, is pretty much when the domain was delegated, was
[inaudible] delegation, not ICANN – well, ICANN didn’t exist. So
that means about 24 years. We had our annual event in
December. Everybody is invited. It’s free. It would be first week
of December. And I hope we’ll get some participants from ICANN
and other registries.
We have about half a million plus domains under management.
That means that we have actually shrank over last few years. As
well, I’m going to go in more detail later. We have about – I think
I actually obscured some text by this. Okay. We have about 100
registrars. Some of them are inactive. When we went to EPP, we
got about ½ of them remaining, because many of them didn’t
want to install EPP software [right in] themselves, so actually we
shrank registrar count.
We have multiple models. So for example, .ua names are
available. Also you can get your company under .com.ua or your
organizations are .org.ua, or if you live in certain city, like
Donetsk, you can get your name .donetsk.ua. And, yes, that still

Page 68 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

works, also there have been some issues with financial systems
and other utilities working there.
So now over 50 TLD domains. These domains correspond either
to generics, like .com, .net, .org, or we have some delegated by
the city name. And that’s something unique I want to talk about
later. We have a private company as a manager, so never
actually being run by the government. Before the company was
established, it was run by individuals. But the corporation
happened in year of 2001. So most people consider us to be
there forever. We actually recently signed accountability
framework with ICANN, and that gave us little more hand up in
talks about domain delegation.
So there are only two foreign registrars, and really encourage
everybody – I know you’re not our target market, but anyway,
perhaps you have knowledge about that – to come to us and
become one. But I’m not here to sell. Just want to stress two
things. The renewal rate, even though the number of
[delegation] shrank, had remained pretty high. I was actually
amused by that. I thought it’s much worse, especially for the .ua
names which are trademark related.
We operate our own WHOIS registry, meaning that our registrars
are just adding data to the database by EPP. So we don’t ever
had the system when the data was distributed through the

Page 69 of 95

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

registrars. When we moved to EPP, we eliminated NIC handles.
And so that was all moved to the centralized database, even
though the WHOIS handles were also managed by us.
IDNs and EPP were available for several years. It has been a
while

since

I

did

my

presentation

about

our

EPP

implementation. So since then, it has expanded to cover most of
the domains, because then it was just a pilot. DNSSEC was
launched a couple years ago. And, well, I can count my DNSSEC
domains on – okay, now on two hands. It used to be one. We had
only one major bank to sign the domain, then promptly was
withdrawn because they felt like it’s not really competitive with
Amazon, believe it or not, Amazon domain hosting. And some
other stories, but it’s too little time to talk about this.
There are a few policy points. As I said, registry is thick. It’s not
listed there. You can privacy protect all of your data, including
your name. The registrar will do that for you. And that’s due to
the pretty strict local legislation. There have been debates
whether it’s good for people or not. If the criminals will hide, the
good guys can. So privacy and security sometimes can [do] each
other. But still, of course, the court or other binding document
can let to uncover this.
We automatically extend by one year. We had a lot of
discussions whether transfer should be done for free. And the

Page 70 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

result of that, to discourage the registrar hopping, every transfer
has to be paid. It would have to be paid and would extend
registration for one year, up to the ten maximum. There are no
domicile restrictions. There actually haven’t been ever any. And
the renewals are always automatic, although there is a 30-day
grace period when the registrar is not billed.
And again, that is probably my advice to Finnish guys. When you
work on your transition, really consider the billing cycles of your
registrars. I don’t know what would they want. But depending,
of course, on your country business practices, it may be very
interesting repercussions, for example, if they paid for the
service and the domain is cancelled, how the thing work. Like for
example, if the client didn’t pay but the registrar did pay, or
other way around. So the automatic installations may be your
enemy when you move to the registrar model.
We have this interesting policy case. We traditionally used city
names for local domains, and then capital of Kiev, back in ‘90s, I
guess, was more Russian speaking than Ukrainian speaking.
Now it’s actually the reverse. So the parallel domain, kiev.ua was
launched, as well as some other domains. And we thought long
and hard about how are we going to implement this, because
lots of people had kyiv.ua names. Not everyone wants to
replicate their name. What we did, that we basically reserved all
the names, but it’s not just one-time reservation. It’s a

Page 71 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

permanent reservation, meaning that these two domains
operate as mirror by owner, but different by technical
parameters. So if you’re the owner in one of them, you can
register the same name in the other. It must be the same
registrant. It must be the same registrar too, because then the
registrar can check that it’s indeed the same person.
And the technical parameters can be different. So, for example,
you can move to the new domain and kill the other one. In the
first year that was available for free. After that, you have to pay
for both domains if you want to keep parallel names. If you want
just to keep one name, you can keep one name and the other
would never be available to anybody but you. That was set for
three years. And now there’s two years remaining. And then we
will see whether we want to expand it for another couple of
years or not.
So some things we have learned, and it’s not all we have
learned, that price is surprisingly not a big factor. I mean, $5 a
year or $10 a year is not a big difference. As you may not know,
the Ukrainian currency have dropped in value about 60%, so
meaning that the euro rate in the banks are now about 28. Used
to be 11. So it means that, in theory, domains should have went
down in price three times. In fact, we did increase our prices a
bit, more according to country inflation indexes. But that wasn’t
really indexed to the dollar or euro. It was something in

Page 72 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

between. Even though that happened, most of our customers
have kept their domains. It just means that dollar amounts is not
a high price if you want to operate a business with online
presence, right? Although I have heard some people say, “Look,
$10 a year too much. It should be $5. It should be $3.”
So I’m going to tell you two short stories. So the one – oh yeah,
and we use Anycast. And I was mentioned the DNSSEC and the
adoption is really bad, although IPv6 is a little better.
The “lawyers are not your friends” part is very interesting. We
had several legal cases over the last couple years. And again, I’m
not going to go through them. But the one that was most
interesting, and the one that I don’t have a killer slide in here
because I wasn’t able to obtain a proper copy of the document
in electronic format – maybe I’ll edit and send it later with the
additional slide just after this.
There was one court case when the guy who sold the company,
who used to be the owner of the company, kept the trademark
registered to himself. And the result, the domain name was
really left into his name. Well, the new owners found, after
investing, I guess, hundreds of thousands of dollars for the new
online shop of flowers, I think, and other things, that they can’t
actually operate the domain. So the dispute lasted for a couple
of years already. It’s still in the courts. What’s interesting is that

Page 73 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

the court recent decision in that case says, from my memory of
course, “Please put such-and-such domain list in the EPP client
hold status.” So in my opinion, it’s the first time ever you see
EPP status codes [inaudible] in a court document. Maybe that’s
progress. So I don’t know what next. It would probably, I don’t
know, maybe include autonomous system numbers for ISPs that
want to use that domain or stuff. So there was lesson number
one.
Lesson number two was the one, the case with the DNSSEC by
the bank, that communication is everything. And of course,
everyone knows that. But what practically happened is that
somebody who I knew in the bank contacted me, and I
contacted them back. And we launched this pilot of the DNSSEC.
Basically, the signing was done by the bank. They knew how to
do this because they had recently the .bank domain, and the
.bank gTLD has requirement for DNSSEC. So they already knew
how to do that.
What happened though, when they suddenly decided to move to
the new DDoS protection system with their own DNS – no, there
was not CloudFlare, because I know CloudFlare does DNSSEC.
And we did work with them a bit on some experimental DNSSEC
deployment. They just suddenly had to undo that. And of course,
normal business practice would be to send this during business
hours instead of start messaging me on Facebook or something.

Page 74 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

So, yeah, once you deploy new technologies, it’s very important
to keep the loop short.
That’s pretty much two lessons I want to talk about. Oh yeah,
and last thing about the growth, or actually not growth, I have
some numbers on my phone I will probably add to this
presentation too. So if you take the June 1st of 2014, just after
the Crimean annexation by Russia and other unfortunate
political events in our presidential election, and appealed in the
Eastern Ukraine, the domain count was 670,000. As of today, it’s
550,000. So that’s about 18% down. The negative growth in the
year after that events were about 13%, and for the last six
months has been flat.
So basically, I would say you can use the number of domains
delegated as your macroeconomic indicator. And it has delay of
about six months, because we started to see the significant drop
in new registration by end of the year that the events happened,
and we started to see the slowdown and basically zeroing the
fall I would say, the minimum growth, in the middle of this year.
And actually, the economic situation Ukraine vastly improved
since the beginning of this year, when the currency finally was
stabilized.
So that may be interesting thing for people in developing
economies to watch and maybe [install] the data. I don’t know.

Page 75 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Really, your week, two week, or maybe month, two months
registration deltas, like the additions, renewals, and deletions,
may be a good – especially when you subdivide them by
geography, a good way to gauge your economic activity in your
country. So that’s actually lesson number 3, which is not here.
I’ll add it too.
Thanks. Any questions, perhaps?

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Questions?

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Oh yeah, this slide. These are just our contacts, my e-mail and
our general e-mail for the company.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Further questions? No? Okay. Thank you. Thank you, Dmitry.

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Thanks.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

So the next will be Andrew Molivurae.

Page 76 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

ANDREW MOLIVURAE:

EN

Good morning, everyone. And thank you, Hiro, for allowing this
session for me to share a bit about .vu.
First of all, I have a few slides, and it should not take long. A few
things to go through this morning is, first of all, one, where it is. I
know it’s quite a long way away, and many people do not really
know where that is. And then I’ll talk a bit about what the role of
my organization is and what is it to do with .vu ccTLD name
space. And then what we’re trying to achieve, what has
happened in the past, the current situation, and of course, the
anticipated future.
So if you do not know where Vanuatu is, it is somewhere there,
between Australia, Fiji, and New Caledonia, and New Zealand.
So generally, Vanuatu is made up of 83 islands, and 63 are
inhabited. We have a very small population of 285,000, with a
land area of 4,000. And 75% of our population live in the rural
areas, and 25% in urban areas, with six provinces and three
small towns. In the telecommunication coverage, it is 92% at the
moment, but it’s mainly voice, with some 2.5 or 2.7G Internet
availability to those 92%. We have 3G and 4G, basically in the
main four centers as listed there. So that’s a bit of a general
information about the country.
So what is the role of TRR? If I [must say], that is the short form
of that long name. So it is the telecom regulators that is in

Page 77 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Vanuatu. As we all know, .vu is the ISO code for the Vanuatu, as a
nation, ccTLD. And it has been delegated to a private company,
Telecom Vanuatu Ltd. At the time of the delegation, Telecom
Vanuatu was owned by three companies, including the
Government of Vanuatu. So the British Telecom and French
Telecom and the Vanuatu government all shared one-third share
each in the company. And at the time, it was the government, so
it proper to have it delegated to Telecom, who was, at the time,
who actually had the infrastructure in place.
So what is the role? TRR is new. It’s only the law was enacted in
2009. And in that act, there is a section that provides for TRR to
manage and administer the .vu country code. And since that
time, there has been a lot of discussions on the issue of – excuse
me – how it will be done. And as you can see, it took quite a
while. There has been a lot of collaboration within the
stakeholders in the country.
So what can we say that – what is TRR trying to achieve with this
ccTLD? Well, we want to have it at the international level, to be
reliable and secure DNS infrastructure; a well-managed registry
service; and also to have multiple, probably one or two,
registrars or more, because the market of telecommunications
in the country has been liberalized in 2008. And also, to promote
.vu ccTLD, basically within country, because a lot of people
currently are registering .com or other domains for their

Page 78 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

businesses. And also, so that we can develop adaptable policies
to manage the ccTLD better, so that it is in line with
international standards.
So the current situation is that TVL, or Telecom Vanuatu, is the
ICANN-recognized manager of the .vu ccTLD. And it runs the
registry and the only registrar. It has implemented DNSSEC two
years ago. And, yeah, the registry, yeah, it’s there, called
Vanuatu Network Information Center. And we have had a lot of
discussions with Telecom, and we are in good relationship with
them as we are moving forward with this approach.
And TRR has also developed a new ccTLD regulation, as
reflected in the TRR Act of 2009. And I want to thank a few
people in our region that have supported us in developing the
regulation. The .nz, especially Debbie from the Domain Name
Commission in .nz, she and her team have been assisting us a lot
in developing this regulation. And also, we have got some
support from .au as well.
So as we speak now, this regulation is being finalized and is
going to become effective probably in the next week or so. So
our approach going forward is to finalize the regulation. The
next part of it is to tender out registry services to see if we can
get some interest for someone or organization to run the registry
services. And also, we are working with the Telecom on interim

Page 79 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

registry services as we’re going forward. And then also, we want
to have some more registrars, whether on shore or maybe one or
two offshore. We’re going to accredit those. And, yes, and TRR is
anticipating the redelegation of the management of .vu. And as I
said, we are working very closely with Telecom Vanuatu at the
moment for the transition to actually take place.
So I think that’s a bit of an update of .vu, and thank you.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Thank you very much. Questions? Yes, please.

MATS DUFBERG:

Do you have support for IDN names? I see that at least French is
spoken in your country, would need IDN.

ANDREW MOLIVURAE:

At this moment, I would say no, not yet.

MATS DUFBERG:

Do you have plans for IDN?

ANDREW MOLIVURAE:

I think we maybe look at that, yeah, in the future, in the coming.

Page 80 of 95

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

MATS DUFBERG:

Thank you.

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Anymore questions? Okay, thank you, Andrew.
So the last presentation will be given by Freddy Manullang.

FREDDY MANULLANG:

Yes. Okay, thank you, Hiro. First, my name, Freddy Manullang.
And I am a system network administrator – sorry – and PANDI.
The topic of my presentation is .id country updates.
Okay, before I go to agenda or point of [inaudible], let me
introduce to you about PANDI. PANDI is a non-profit
organization and the registry for .id Internet domain names.
Sorry, is it working? No. Ah, okay.
Next slides, Kim. Okay.
Okay.

PANDI,

established

in

December

2006

in

a

multistakeholder approach involving government, academics,
ICT communities, ICT industry. Fully operates in July 2007.
PANDI moved from SPRS to SRS in October 2012, and IANA
redelegation process in May 2013.
Next, please. Okay, next, please. It’s not working. Yeah.

Page 81 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Okay, this slide about domain statistic from 2015 until June 26.
Red bars are months in 2015. Start from January, there are
123,960 of domain name registered. And blue bars are months in
2016, from January to June. There are 192,496 of domain name
registered. So over the year, registration increased 68,536 from
January 2015 until 2016.
Next slide, please.
Okay, these are about technical development. The first point of
technical development, there are 176 domain name has DS
record, means 176 .id domain names run on DNSSEC. Also, when
we have run some DNSSEC workshop, the latest DNSSEC
workshop in the PANDI meeting held in May 2016. And also,
PANDI have DRC in Batam, start operating in October 2015. The
last point of the technical development, PANDI has Anycast
servers that they distribute to local server in several cities, like
five servers in Jakarta, one server in Batam, one server in Jogja,
one server again in Surabaya, on server in Bali, and the last one
Anycast server in Australia, host by APNIC.
Next slide, please.
PANDI has been certified ISO 27001:2013 since April 18, 2016,
which cover risk assessment; information security policy;
information security management system policy, standard and
procedure; monitoring and measurement; business [inaudible]

Page 82 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

plan and disaster recovery plan; internal audits; and
management review.
Next slide, please.
Okay. This point of my presentation, about 1 million .id domain
names. 1 million .id domain names is program of the Ministry of
Communication and Information Technology Republic of
Indonesia. So this not PANDI program, actually. The program
period is three years, from 2016 until 2018. And the program free
for the first year means the registrants, you pay for in your
domain name hosting. This not target, but expectation for
registration for registered domain name is 350,000 domain
names each year. Currently, from January until June 2016,
around 6,000 domain name registered on this program.
Next slide, please.
Okay, why? The reason why ICT Ministry the Republic of
Indonesia runs this program, because ICT Ministry the Republic
of Indonesia have some reason to run this program. The first is
March 2016, import international bandwidth has been 1.5
terabits per second, or around 16 trillion rupiahs. And so we’re
increasing the number of .id domain users Indonesia, is expect
to use less international bandwidth in the future. And Indonesia
has about 57 million small and medium enterprise business
operator, but only 7 million of them are in the trading business

Page 83 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

in digital. So 50 million small and medium enterprise business
operator not use Internet for trading.
Okay, next slide, please.
Okay, about who and how. So who is able to operate the
program? The program is open all small and medium enterprise
business, schools, communities, and village in Indonesia. And
this point about how the program work, the program is free.
Applicant will get .id domain name and hosting for one year. ICT
Ministry allocate around 15 billion rupiahs, or around $3.8
million US, to use this Internet [inaudible] with the program
[inaudible] with Indonesia hosting only. So the program, not
used for [end] hosting or foreign data center service.
It’s so long to describe how this might work, but I can try quickly,
technically. PANDI, as the registry, create a new registrar [are
gone]. Then ICT Ministry [default] registrar application. And the
application connect to registry by [APP] protocol. And selected
hosting provider connect to the application by [APA]. Okay, the
first procedure to get domain names, applicant like small and
medium use this. School communities, and villages try to
register a domain name in the application. And the final step of
registration, applicant must fill number of ID card, and also
uploaded scan of ID card, and also legal document. Example for
legal document for small and medium business is [inaudible]

Page 84 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

license. So they are two documents must uploaded. The first is
ID card, and the second is legal documents.
Application will reject registration automatically [first-time]
identity number, so one ID card or one registration. There are
ten operators work for [refer] registration manually. They will
review each ID card and legal documents. If registration is
comply or approve, the application will do some things. The first
is the application will do registration automatically. When send
registration, [APP] comments to registry. And the second
[inaudible] if level hosting [inaudible] based sequence
procedure. This through by [APA]. And then send it [inaudible] to
applicant e-mail automatically.
Next slide, please.
Location of the program, sorry. 350,000 .id domain names to be
released to small/medium business enterprise, schools,
communities, and villages in the Goes Digital event, with
targeting 20 province every year. We are currently focused the
four province, namely West Java, Central Java, Yogyakarta, and
East Java. And the last ICT Ministry, we apply back transaction to
registry and its hosting provider at end of every year. The big
challenge we’re facing until now, most of small and medium
enterprise doesn’t want to have a [web set].
Okay. The last slide? This our e-mail slide. Any question?

Page 85 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

EN

Questions? Okay, thank you, Freddy. So I think this is the end of
the morning session. Please thank all the presenters.
So are there any message from the Chair or the Secretariat now?
No? Okay.

MATS DUFBERG:

[inaudible]

HIROFUMI HOTTA:

Of course.

MATS DUFBERG:

Actually, question for Ukraine, because it’s an IDN question
again. So you didn’t mention if there’s support for IDN under .ua.

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Oh, yes, thanks for bringing this up. So we had actually launched
the IDNs just before we launched TPP. We had our table
registered with IANA, and it’s Cyrillic letters. Yeah, so I didn’t
mention that. We had original allowed that only in some of
second-level domains, like for example in .com.ua you can have
that. Under .ua, due to pending policy change of the trademark
restriction, which we plan to repeal at some future point, the

Page 86 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

IDNs [we’re not able]. But we are planning to launch them first
before we open it for general availability. So meaning that .ua
itself is only Latin, and the second-level domains can have the
delegations in non-Latin script. But –

MATS DUFBERG:

How many percent of the domain names?

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Oh, the percentage of that, off the top of my head, it’s in single
digits. It used to be close to five or six. I think now we may be
down. I can actually, if you let me wait for just one second, I’ll
tell you immediately.

MATS DUFBERG:

Yes. A rough figure is enough.

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Yeah, it’s a few percent. As the hostmaster.ua [inaudible] doing
this right now to answer your question. We have monthly reports
of the status, and we have certain number of percent. I’ll tell
you. I will tell you right now. I’m looking at percent right now,
just to give you the details.
Any other things you wanted to know about it?

Page 87 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

MATS DUFBERG:

That was my question.

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

In .com.ua, it’s 6,000 out of 300,000. So that’s actually close to
2%. In some other domains – we used to be a little bit higher, but
most people who registered IDN names didn’t renew them. So as
time goes by, they go down. But I still see them on the street
sometimes for targeted ads for some, like an event. So maybe
people use IDNs mostly for one-off things, when they launch a
new product or maybe festival or something. They just use that
to catch attention. They do catch attention.

MATS DUFBERG:

Do you have any mechanisms to prevent lookalikes, to prevent
[crosstalk]?

DMITRY KOHMANYUK:

Yes, we do. That was actually my invention, but okay. So the
simple way is that the Cyrillic alphabet is somewhat similar to
Latin, but it’s not exactly Latin. So the requirement is as follows.
The name has to be all Cyrillic or all Latin. So you cannot mix
scripts. And if you use Cyrillic script, at least one letter must not
look like Latin letters. So basically, we have two types of Cyrillic

Page 88 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

letters in our table. If you go to IANA database, you’ll see that the
specific and Latin lookalike. And you have to have at least one
specific Cyrillic letter. So for example, letter Я would work, which
looks like Latin R upside down. Letter R would not work, if you
have a single-letter domain. If you have multiple-letter domains,
as long as you have at least one letter that is genuinely Cyrillic
letter, then we know you’re not doing the Latin script. And then
rest of the letters would be Cyrillic as well. They’re just not
counted. You can have them as many as you want.

MATS DUFBERG:

Thank you.

KATRINA SATAKI:

I won’t let you finish so early. So the question, actually, I have a
question to our host, Juhani. We were a little bit confused here
when you mentioned this children-friendly domains, meaning
that you will allow children to have their domains registered.
And actually, I think you complained that you are the only
children non-friendly domain. Probably the only explanation I
have, as far as I understand, is you have the law for domain
names. So you register them as administrative acts, apparently.
Domain name registration is an administrative act.

Page 89 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Because for us, it’s civil agreement. Basically, it’s a contract,
right? So children are not allowed to enter into a contract,
because they have to accept certain liabilities when they do. So
we do not allow children to enter the contract, because it’s not
allowed under the law. So if a parent registers a domain name
for the child, yeah, certainly the child can use it. But legal
obligations are still under the parent. Yeah, so could you
elaborate a little bit more about this child thing? How did you
mean it? Thank you. 15 minutes. Thank you.

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Okay. In that case, so if you want to have a long answer, do you
have any lawyers here? Sanna, [Kirousi]? There’s at least – I see
Sanna is out. Can you please answer to this question? There’s a
mic here.
Actually, we have had those cases when parents bought a
domain name for their children actually. It was not a nice job to
refund that kind of domains, telling those parents that, “No, you
cannot do that.” So Sanna is here. She is our lawyer.

SANNA SAHLMAN:

Hello. Thank you very much, Juhani and Katrina. What a
pleasure. I would like to discuss this topic outside, without the
microphone.

Page 90 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

Well, complicated. Registering a domain in Finland at the
moment, it is an administrative act. Like we do a digital decision
to the registrants to get the domains. And like Juhani said, we
only have a law. We don’t have any contracts between registrars,
nor with the registrants. And at the moment, it’s simple because
it just says in the law that you have to be more than 15-year-old
to get a .fi domain. And the rule will be gone, starting from 5th of
September.
So as I think it, it’s just as simple that anyone, as a private
person, can have a .fi domain name, and it doesn’t matter how
old you are. You just put your Social Security Number there if
you register domain name under a private person. If a private
person registers a domain, it still will be an administrative act,
but we don’t give the decisions as of the 5th of September
anymore. We just take it as a registration, simple. Filling the
form, putting the credits there. As a private person, for example,
Social Security Number. And if you are registering a domain to
your child, you can either put your own Social Security Number
there as a parent or your child’s.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Yes. And if something bad or if spam messages have been sent
out using this domain, and it’s registered to a 7-year-old, how
are you going to react?

Page 91 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

SANNA SAHLMAN:

EN

Anyone else want to answer this question? I can give the mic to
someone else. What is in other registries? What do you do?

KATRINA SATAKI:

We do not register [inaudible] do not allow.

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

Thank you, Sanna, very much.

NIGEL ROBERTS:

Well, you want to know what other registries do. We had a rather
interesting case some time ago. But the difference is really that
you are doing this as an administrative act and not as a contract.
So for example, can you issue, as administrative act, a passport
to a 2-year-old? Of course you can. You may have to have the
parents who are going to make the signature, but of course you
can. And so the rules are under the administrative.
We operate purely as a contract. Now, in the UK and in the
Channel Islands, the ability of a minor to enter into a contract is
not as clear as you think. It’s not simply 18. It’s 18 for everything,
but underneath 18, it depends on the age and the type of the
contract, until you get to the age of 5 or 4 or a child that can just
speak. They can still do a contract, but they can only do a

Page 92 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

EN

contract for something that is necessary, like buying some food
or something like that. I’m not sure a domain is necessary.
When you get to the age of maybe about 13, 11, 12, you’re
getting into the area in the UK of what they call Gillick
competence, which means that a 13-year-old can give consent
to various things, such as contraception, even. And it depends
on the child concerned. Some children can do this, and some
can’t. And the assessment is whether the person can do it. So if
you have a 13-year-old who’s a clever hacker, of course they can
register a domain name. If you have a complete idiot, perhaps
not. Maybe that’s where you get the spam from.
So we took a view, we only had one case like this, where we had
– and I think the guy was 16 or 15 or something like that. He
registered a bunch of domain names and then didn’t pay for
them. It was easier for us to say, “We cancel the contract,”
because he wasn’t competent to enter into the contract. But
that was a convenience for his father, so not having to pay the
bill. But we don’t inquire. It’s only if there’s a problem we’d have
an issue.

PATRIZIO POBLETE:

Page 93 of 95

Sorry, Nigel, I was about to ask you a question. But, no, no, later.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

KATRINA SATAKI:

[inaudible] later.

PATRIZIO POBLETE:

I know, I know, but not now. Not now.

MARGARITA VALDÉS CORTÉS:

EN

Something that maybe you need to keep in mind,

sometimes in legal systems you, as authority, the act of register
a domain name could be administrative from your perspective.
But sometimes from the particular, is a civil contract. It’s a civil
act. So probably you may have to, when your rules will be
running, keep in mind that probably you will have two kinds of
visions of this same act, civil or private, from the perspective of
the registrant, and maybe public or administrative act from your
perspective. But at the end of the day, probably if you say that
the registrant have to have 15 years old, the key question, is 15
years old is an age that people is available to do something else?
It’s like you have citizen rights or something else? That’s the
good question for you. Thank you.

PATRIZIO POBLETE:

Well, you know how the Internet is really used. Will your rules
allow me to buy a domain for my cat?

Page 94 of 95

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 1 (Part 1)

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

EN

Well, actually, I think it’s for human beings only. I’m sorry. But
you can buy it for your cat. Just put in your contact information
there.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

If the cat is over 18, can the cat enter a contract under UK
common law?

JUHANI JUSELIUS:

That was a good idea. Maybe we should expand our marketing
to those pets as well.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

I’m afraid Catalonia was there first.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Okay, that’s fine. We will reconvene at 1:30, and we’ll continue
with a very interesting session on transition and all related stuff,
CWG. Yes, Lise will chair the session.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 95 of 95

