HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session
Sunday, June 26, 2016 – 08:30 to 17:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Today is Sunday, June 26, 2016. This is the CCWG Accountability
WS2 session. We are in Hall A, and the local time will be 8:30 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Good morning, everyone. We’re going to start shortly.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

For those of you that are in the room and would like to get on
the Wi-Fi, you can select the ICANN 56 WPA network. The
password is Helsinki56. Again, if you want to get on the Wi-Fi, the
passcode is Helsinki56. Again, that’s Helsinki56.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Just for the remote participants, blame it on the good times,
blame it on the sunshine, blame it on the boogie. Sorry, we’re a
little late. We will start in two minutes.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Welcome, everyone. This is Mathieu Weill speaking, the CCWG
co-chair of the Cross Community Working Group on Enhancing

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

ICANN Accountability. Welcome to this face-to-face meeting,
which is dedicated to launching our Work Stream 2 effort.
To start with, I’d like to make sure we have the roll call set. I
encourage you to all log into the AC room to facilitate that. I
would like to ask whether there are any remote participants not
logged into the AC room.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Cheryl was delayed at a mentoring talk, but she’ll be here in a
few minutes.

MATHIEU WEILL:

So Cheryl Langdon-Orr will join us shortly. I’m aware of Jordan
Carter, who has sent apologies for not being able to attend and
will be joining part of the meeting from Rome. Steve DelBianco’s
flight has been delayed, and he will join as soon as he has put his
bag in his hotel. We can expect him to join shortly or at least
during the day. I’m sure we’ll be joined by others during the
course of the day. We’ll probably remind everyone to join the AC
room so that we can get a full list of attendance to this meeting.
I would also like to start the meeting by thanking ICANN for
setting up this face-to-face meeting in this new Meeting B setup.
Actually, everyone is learning how it works. We are aware of the
extra steps that were taken by staff to accommodate this

Page 2 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

meeting. I’m especially grateful for the very nice setup that we
benefit from today here in Helsinki with brilliant sunlight
outside. Which, by the way, you can stay in the room because
the sunlight is going to stay very late and you probably already
enjoyed it, so you’re not losing as much as in other locations by
being in this room while it’s sunny outside, so consider this.
A few meeting rules as a reminder. Please state your name when
speaking because there are some remote participants. Also,
we’ll have a timer ready if need be for the two-minute rule. We
hope we don’t have to use it today but, just in case, we thought
we’d make a note of it.
Finally, I think what really characterized our Work Stream 1
discussions were the collaborative approach, the tone of respect
for each other’s opinion, and we think this is really what we need
to continue fostering amongst ourselves during the Work Stream
2 discussions and hope that we’ll all be in the same constructive
mindset as we’ve been in Work Stream 1 during the Work Stream
2 efforts. Thank you in advance for your constructive approach
in the discussions we’ll have today.
I think that will be it for the meeting rules. Probably we can now
move to the agenda of this meeting. As you see, this is a Work
Stream 2 meeting. We’ll try to initiate discussions on the various
topics. Obviously, given the number of topics, we’ll not get deep

Page 3 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

into each of them, but we’ll try to steer the discussions forward
so that the various groups can then prepare for deliberations
down the road.
We have three Lightning Talks sessions (we’ll get back to that) as
well as a couple of more generic items. Our hope is that by the
end of this session, everyone gets a better view of what can be
expected from the discussions in the various topics but also of
how Work Stream 2 is going to take place, how it’s going to get
organized, and who is going to be active in which topics. I’m
really looking at the room that we will need volunteers. We will
need your active contributions to move those topics forward. It’s
not going to happen out of a magic trick, so we’ll all need to
define where to apply our efforts, how to apply them so that the
topics can move swiftly.
I think for the sake of process, I should make sure that there are
no specific comments on the agenda. I see none, so I think we
can move to the next slide and getting into the Work Stream 2
discussions.
These are topics we’ve discussed before in terms of generally
how we will organize Work Stream 2. This is recapped here so
that we all share the same information at the beginning of this
day. Work Stream 1 is not yet completed, but we’re very close
now. There are still as far as Accountability is concerned a few

Page 4 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

items open, such as the IRP implementation, which is not in the
scope of Work Stream 2.
The IRP Phase 2 as we college it is not Work Stream 2 because,
obviously, it’s implementing requirements that we have defined
and have been approved as part of Work Stream 1, whereas
Work Stream 2 are topics that we’ve [scoped] in the Work
Stream 1 effort and where we need to assess consensus between
ourselves on specific recommendations related to those topics
which will later be implemented. I hope this distinction is clear
for everyone [at this point].
Work Stream 2 is scheduled to finish around June 2017. We have
nine topics. That’s the biggest challenge we have. Nine topics is
a lot. It’s obviously not possible to synchronize them all the time
without delaying the overall process, so we’re aware that not all
topics will start at the same time or with the same energy. We
might need to prioritize them into, for instance, the simpler or
lighter topics where consensus may be easier to reach and
others which will take a longer time to reach consensus.
We’ll have the opportunity to discuss with the community as a
whole – because, obviously, the discussion is not only in this
room or with this group – during two major ICANN meetings,
ICANN 57 in Hyderabad and ICANN 58 in Copenhagen, so not far
from here. We’ve agreed that work will be led by sub-teams,

Page 5 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

while the CCWG itself retains, obviously, the consensus
assessment. That’s the generic view. The next slide please. In
terms of timeline, if you’re in the AC room, you get a special
bonus because you can actually read that slide on your screen
because it’s a little dense.
The idea here is to highlight two potential scenarios for timeline.
One for potentially simpler or lighter topics where we could be
at a stage by October this year to agree to issue a document for
public input which could then be discussed in Hyderabad with
that community, receive comments by end of November,
analyze in December, refined and potentially a final output can
be issued for adoption in Copenhagen. That would be the fast
track on topics where by chance or by skill we would be able to
reach consensus quickly.
For more complex topics, obviously we would need at least two
rounds. You see what type of timeline this would lead us to on
the right side where probably Hyderabad would be a first
informal discussion but substantive with the community, just an
update. The public input would be around Copenhagen and,
hopefully, we might be able to refine the final output in time for
June 2017.
Obviously, those are tentative timelines. It’s more to make sure
we share the same type of expectations. Reality will certainly

Page 6 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

kick in at some point, but having a plan is a first step. Then if we
have to adjust the plan, we’ll adjust the plan. That’s the initial
thinking on the timeline.
Any questions on the timeline discussions? Comments? I’m
looking at the issue in priority because, just as a reminder, it’s
easier if you can log into the AC room and raise your hand in the
AC room for the queue management. I’m seeing no comments so
far. It’s already covered ground, so let’s move on to the next
slide then.
As a reminder as well of the discussion we’ve had about what we
expect from the subgroups, how we expect the deliverables on
the various Work Stream 2 items to look like. Basically, we
expect them to look like the annex of Work Stream 1 report. The
structure is an executive summary; a description of the issue,
including the description of the current state of play and
incorporation of the discussions and inputs we have received
from the Work Stream 1 effort, the supplemental report; and a
section describing the requirements for the recommendation.
It’s a reminder that our group is not tasked at this pinot to
provide actual Bylaw wording or wordsmithing, but define
requirements for approval which will then be implemented.
Then obviously, as we’ve seen with the Bylaw exercise, we have
another few [loops] before it’s finalized. And, of course,

Page 7 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

including the rationale for the recommendations is a
requirement.
There was really section which was supposed to be here. I don’t
know why it has gone missing. But a reminder that the Work
Stream 2 effort still needs to demonstrate how our
recommendations are meeting what was previously known as
the NTIA requirements.
These requirements are going to be translated into a specific
Bylaw article on Work Stream 2, so the same criteria – [our
support], the multi-stakeholder approach, etc. – are still
guidelines

for

our

group

to

assess

whether

our

recommendations are actually enhancements. So we still need
to demonstrate and do our due diligence about how we are
meeting these criteria.
I don’t know how we’re going to name them because it’s
technically no longer the NTIA criteria, or at least it will no longer
be after September 30, but they still remain. They are in the
Bylaws, and we still need to be very careful to demonstrate that
we are doing the due diligence that we are meeting these criteria
with each and every one of our recommendations. We’ll have to
fix the slide to make sure this is captured again so no one gets
confused.

Page 8 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

So that’s the template we’re expecting from every subgroup in
terms of their deliverable. Any questions on that? No? We’re still
[inaudible]? Good. Next slide then.
I think I’m already to the point of our next agenda item, which is
the Introduction to Lighting Talks. Since there’s no further
question at this point, I think, Leon, would you like to give a
short introduction to this concept and get the room warmed up
for it?

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Happy to do that, Mathieu. Hello, everyone. Welcome to

Helsinki. As you know, we will be holding some lightning talks,
but let’s see what a lightning talk is to begin with. A lightning
talk as we have envisioned it is a very short presentation meant
as a way to brainstorm and generate ideas around the scope
and focus of Work Stream 2 efforts.
This means that we have different and several volunteers that
have signed up to provide us with a lightning talk on different
issues. What we like to have in these lightning talks is, of course,
a very short and concrete point of view, a very short and
concrete [kickoff] so that the rest of the group and the larger
group can begin brainstorming, as we said, on certain issues.

Page 9 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

There are several Work Stream 2 topics that have more than one
volunteer already willing to provide a lightning talk. This is, of
course, and example of how lightning talks not only may have
different approaches and different points of view that want to be
shared but also the fact that the more volunteers we have
providing lightning talks on different Work Stream 2 topics, the
richer the effort and the exercise will be [carried].
A little bit of rules on lightning talks is that we are providing a
five-minute maximum space per speaker. This talk must be
related to a specific Work Stream 2 issue.
Remember that we have called for volunteers, as I said. There
has been already a list of volunteers that signed up for different
Work Stream 2 issues already circulated. We still have some slots
open, so if there is anyone that would like to actually provide a
lightning talk in one of those available slots, you are free to
actually just sign up for that particular open slot.
These talks should describe your approach or your vision to
address a particular Work Stream 2 topic. As I said, there is not a
single or right way to address any particular issue. There must
be different approaches and different points of view, so we are
open of course to listening to each and every point of view and
approach on the different issues.

Page 10 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

We think that this will benefit our work because this creates a
shared sense of direction for Work Stream 2 topics, and the
higher volunteer engagement we have, the richer the exercise
will be.
It will also highlight the key tensions and conflicts behind
visions. With this, we will be open to fist fighting in some points, I
guess. I think that this will, of course, lead to very interesting
points of view from many of you in the different topics.
It will help identify leaders for each topic. This will mean that
those of you who are most passionate about a topic might
actually be volunteering to lead one of the subgroups working
on the different Work Stream 2 topics.
It will help us also identify topics with greater or lower
momentum. There have been already some topics with many
people interested in them. There are some topics that are
lacking people interested in the different topics. If we have
topics that have no volunteers already signed up for them, we
definitely encourage those of you who are not already
volunteering for a certain issue to come forward and volunteer
for those topics that have no volunteers already willing to speak
on the issue.
This also will help us organize our work forward. There will be a
big load of work in certain topics, but there are other topics that

Page 11 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

shouldn’t take as much air from the room as those with heavy
loads of work. So that will also help us prioritize our work, as
Mathieu said, in the expected timeline.
With this, I think I’d like to open the floor for any – oh, okay, so
we do have already some questions on the lightning talks. The
first on the queue is Greg Shatan. Greg, could you please
[inaudible]?

GREG SHATAN:

Good morning. I’d like to volunteer to give a lightning talk on
Human Rights. I think there’s an open slot there.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Greg. We’ll take note of that.

Grace, could you please add Greg to the lightning talks on
Human Rights?
Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. You’ve had no mention of any rebuttals or
discussions about the lightning talks, but you’re allocating
significantly more than five minutes per talk in the sessions.
Does this give us permission to exceed the five minutes, or do
you have some other plans?

Page 12 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

EN

Well, the intention is to have, of course, the lightning talk

for five minutes. And since the most fruitful way of taking
advantage of the lightning talk is to actually interact with each
other, we are trying to have a ten-minute question and answer
after each lightning talk.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. You had been silent on that, so I wanted it to be
clear.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thanks, Alan. Any other questions or comments on the

lightning talks and how we’re trying to build this up? Okay, so
having no more questions, I’d like to turn the microphone to my
co-chair, Thomas Rickert.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Leon. Hello, everyone. I see there’s a hand
raised. Sebastien, would you please take the floor.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Yes, sorry. I was too late to go to the AC room. I have a question
why you add objective of those lightning talks. I am concerned
with the fact that now you decide in putting the Benefits like

Page 13 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

“helps identify leaders for each topic” that the one who signs up
will be the one. I am not sure that’s – at least that’s the way I
understand it. Maybe you will decide that they are not the
leaders of those working groups. But it’s a little bit strange to
add that as an objective of those lightning talks, and at least it
was not put clearly before who and about which topics we will
be talking during the lightning talks. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Sebastien. Actually, there is no [segue] from
doing a lightning talk into getting a leadership position. It’s just
that individuals in our group get the opportunity to speak to a
topic that they care about, that they’re passionate about. And if
they maybe want to become a subgroup leader, then this could
also be an opportunity for them to present themselves and their
expertise to the group. But actually, there is no direct link to
actually being picked. So no decision on that is made or
prejudiced by doing a lightning talk.
Before we start the series of lightning talks, I see a lot of faces
that I haven’t seen at our previous face-to-face meetings.
Sebastien, sorry. Do you have a follow up?

Page 14 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

EN

Yes. Maybe you can add also in the Details that three talks about
one topic is a requirement, maximum three talks.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Well, maximum maybe. But if we have less than three talks, I
guess it will be difficult to make it a require to have three talks.
But the point is noted.
As I said previously, we have a lot of new faces in the room. I
think it’s good to have more people, potentially new people.
Maybe some of you who are in the room today have been in the
AC room at previous meetings. But I think it has been a
[inaudible] of our group that we have been very welcoming and
have a good team spirit.
So I would like to offer to those that haven’t been with us
physically previously the opportunity to briefly introduce
themselves if they want to. You don’t have to if you don’t want
to, but if you would like to briefly state who you are and state
your affiliation, then it would be easier for the rest of the team to
go over to you during the coffee break and make friends and
introduce themselves to you. So does any one of you wish to say
hi? Please do.

Page 15 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

SONIGITU EKPE:

EN

Hi. My name is Sonigitu Ekpe. I’m from Nigeria. I work with the
Cross River State government, and I have in interest in Internet
and wildlife. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks so much and welcome. Please?

ANDREEA TODORAN:

Good morning, everyone. My name is Andreea Todoran and I’m
also joined by my colleague Erin Dorgan from the government of
Canada. We have indicated our interest in becoming a CCWG
GAC member for Work Stream 2, and we are now awaiting a GAC
decision. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Welcome. Anyone else? Please?

DENISE MICHELLE:

Hi. My name is Denise Michelle. I’m representing Facebook and
also participating in the Business Constituency for the purposes
of Work Stream 2. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Page 16 of 262

Thanks and welcome, Denise. Anyone else? Please?

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

SUSAN PAYNE:

EN

Hi. My name is Susan Payne. I’m in the Intellectual Property
Constituency, and I also participate in the Registry Stakeholder
Group on behalf of some of our clients.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Great. Welcome. Let me pause for a second. Again, this is not a
requirement. It’s just an invitation, but I’m sure that all of you
will meet during coffee breaks or maybe during lunch and also
establish personal contacts, which as our history shows has
been very beneficial to break down barriers between the
different silos and groups inside ICANN. So great.
Now I would suggest that we start with our lightning talks. I
would like to get a signal from staff whether we have Jordan’s
talk ready. Actually, Jordan Carter who can’t be with us
physically today has recorded a video lightning talk, and he will
join us by phone for a conversation.
The first couple of lightning talks are going to be on the subject
of Jurisdiction. Before we do the lightning talks, I would like to
apologize again for the [drafting] glitch in the blog post that
we’ve issued a couple of days back. I’m sure that we will
continue our substantive discussion on the issue probably after
the lightning talks. And I guess we will have more opportunity to
discuss the overall scope, remit, and prioritization of this

Page 17 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

challenging and multifaceted topic today or in the next couple of
weeks.
With that, I have confirmation that we have the video good to
go. May I ask you to start it? Play it for us. Thank you.

JORDAN CARTER:

Hi, everyone. It’s Jordan Carter here from .nz, one of the ccNSO
members of the CCWG. I’m sorry I can’t join you in person today
in Helsinki. I hope the meeting goes well. I just wanted to make a
few points about Jurisdiction by way of a lightning video talk.
The first one I’d like to make is that we need to all really table
the interests that we bring to this discussion early on and as
accurately and openly as we can. There might be political
interests at play, there might be practical interests at play, there
might be commercial ones. I think the more open and upfront
we can all be about what the interests are, the more likely it is
we’ll be able to have a good discussion.
Then following that, we’re going to need to note that some
topics will get raised that it isn’t within our scope as an
accountability working group to deal with. By being really
upfront about the interests, we can make sure that we have a
clearly defined set of topics to work through that don’t risk
leaking out and getting more complicated as we go.

Page 18 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

The second main point I’d like to make is that we should then
define requirements to the topics we’ve agreed. We had a lot of
luck with that earlier on in our process, and the really clear
discussion of the requirements that we have as a group through
our jurisdiction to deliver is important.
We might say that the jurisdiction issue in terms of location has
to be that it can meet the sentiment agreed in the first part of
our work in Work Stream 1. We might say for contracts that a
requirement is predictability of enforcement in the courts. I
don’t know what the requirements are, but I think that it’s a
really helpful way to start before we get into discussions around
recommendations for jurisdictions that could meet them.
Then I think the third piece of work for the group to do is to
actually

make

some

recommendations.

One

of

those

recommendations might be that we shouldn’t change the
jurisdiction, that everything is working as well as it can. Other
recommendations will come out of the work of the group. I don’t
know what they might be.
All of this is, of course, a sensitive topic and a really interesting
one. There’s the ongoing requirement of the transition that we
don’t turn ICANN into an IGO or a government-controlled
institution, and those are important criteria to keep in place.

Page 19 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Anyway, I hope those are helpful. The three points again: making
sure we’re really open about our interests because that will help
us work together really easily; and then making sure we’ve got
the right scope, defining our requirements; and then developing
some recommendations.
I hope that’s helpful, maybe interesting, maybe not. Go well with
your work. I look forward to catching up with you online.
Thanks.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks very much, Jordan. I hope that Jordan has joined us on
the phone bridge already. I’m sure you’ve noticed that Jordan
has promised that he will make three points, and he ended up
making four. This is what the CCWG is about. We promise
something, and we deliver more than we announce. That’s a
good thing, isn’t it?
Jordan, are you with us?

JORDAN CARTER:

Page 20 of 262

…or maybe I’m not.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

Now you are. Welcome, Jordan, and thanks for the video
lightning talk. Is there anything that you would like to add or
speak to now?

JORDAN CARTER:

Just to apologize for [inability] to count and to invite any
questions that people may have.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Let me pass on this question to the group. Do you have any
questions for Jordan? He has suggested a methodology for
approaching this topic. Do you have any comment on that? Do
agree with the way he presented we could approach this? Is
there opposition? Alan? There’s a hand raised from you. Is that
an old hand?

ALAN GREENBERG:

It’s a very old hand.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Very old hand? Okey-dokey. This seems to be a very calm and
probably tired, jet-lagged community today. I would have
expected a lot of interventions on the jurisdiction topic. Okay, if I
may, Jordan or maybe staff can help with this since Jordan is on
the road. I guess it would be worthwhile capturing his four

Page 21 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

concluding points in the notes so that we have something to
lean on as we continue our discussions. Actually, Kavouss hand
is up. Welcome, Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARESTAH:

Yes, good morning. Not tired, not jet-lagged, but [inaudible]
period [inaudible] waiting for [heating up]. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Kavouss? Greg?

GREG SHATAN:

I agree with Jordan’s points and just wanted to underline one of
them, which is expressing your point of view, your agenda, your
goals. It seems like from the previous discussions on this topic,
some people approach this with hidden or semi-hidden
agendas, some of them not hidden at all. But it would be good to
keep the conversation candid to have a sense of what people
seem to be aiming at in this area.
I have another comment on jurisdiction, but I’ll wait for the
other lightning talks to see if it’s covered in one of those other
talks. Thanks.

Page 22 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

Thanks very much, Greg. That allows us to move to the second
lightning talk. As previously mentioned, if you want to put
yourselves in the queue to deliver an additional lightning talk,
this is perfectly possible. Just signal that to us, not only on this
topic but on all of the Work Stream 2 topics. We would very
much appreciate more lightning talks. Maybe you want to do
one spontaneously on this or on the topics that we don’t yet
have lightning talks on. So that would be great.
I haven’t yet seen Phil Corwin in the room. Phil, are you with us
in the room?

JORDAN CARTER:

Could I make just a quick response to Greg’s point?

MATHIEU WEILL:

Please do.

JORDAN CARTER:

The reason I suggested that we should put our interests on the
table is to make the point that all of the interests around
jurisdiction are legitimate and the extent to which they can all
be shared openly will make everyone more able to participate in
real recommendations. Even if people think that their points of
view are awkward or might not want to be heard, I think it’s

Page 23 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

really beneficial for all of our work if everything is put on the
table as far as it can be. That’s all.

MATHIEU WEILL:

That’s a useful clarification. Thank you, Jordan.
Next lightning talk is going to be delivered by Phil Corwin. Phil,
are you with us? Does anyone know whether Phil is in Helsinki?
So he might just be a few minutes late. Let’s go to Pedro’s talk
then. I hope that staff can be flexible and put his slides on.
Pedro, would you like to come to the tabletop? You can see the
group better if you want to please.

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

Yeah, okay. I can do that.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Over to you, Pedro.

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

Okay. Hello, everyone. Nice to see you all again. I have eight
slides and five minutes. I’m not sure if I’m able to make it in five
minutes, but let’s see. I’ll do my best.
Similar to Jordan, I have a lightning talk that covers mainly
process. It’s a suggestion about the process that we should

Page 24 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

probably adopt in order to tackle the issue of jurisdiction. I will
probably make some comments on substance, but it’s mainly a
proposal on process.
I’d like to start with a [usual] assessment of our previous
discussions. I think in the past year, we have had fruitful
discussions on the topics. I think almost everybody has
something to say about jurisdiction. It’s not an irrelevant topic
at all. But my impression is that most of what has been
expressed is more about preferences or, let’s say, wishful
thinking rather than real effects and concepts, [mutual] effects
and concepts.
In my view, I think the debate so far has been maybe a little bit
loaded and not sufficiently fact-based. Of course, this is
important. We need to know the concerns or irritations as Phil
Corwin likes to put it. They need to be taken into account in this
debate, but we need to question ourselves: do these concerns
actually have a solid foundation? Are they based on really true
facts? I think this is one of the objectives of this subgroup is to
base on solid foundation in order to tackle this issue.
I think that expert input in this exercise will be key. So far we
haven’t had. I think we have many people who know a little bit
of the topic commenting on it, but I think we need to have a
formal people established in which experts can give their input. I

Page 25 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

think it will be very beneficial for this exercise. You can move on
to the next.
A brief recap of what we have agreed in our Work Stream 1
report on this topic of jurisdiction. Of course, Thomas
mentioned we have agreed that jurisdiction is a multilayered
issue, or I prefer the word “multifaceted.” It is a very complex
issue.
We have indicated what our main concern or let’s say broad
concern is, which is the influence that ICANN’s existing
jurisdiction may have on the actual operation of policies and
accountability mechanisms. Involving primarily – and it means
not only – the process of settlement of dispute, which means the
choice of jurisdiction of the applicable laws but not necessarily
the location where ICANN is incorporated. We have clearly
indicated that in our report.
We have even also indicated how we will consider this topic in
Work Stream 2, which is also very important to remember. We
have indicated that we would clarify all concerns regarding this
multilayer nature of the jurisdiction issue. We have also agreed
that we would identify potential alternatives and benchmark
their ability to match our accountability requirements.
Based on this assessment and on this recap of what we have
agreed so far, my suggestion (if you go to the next slide) is to

Page 26 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

address the topic of jurisdiction in what I would call a scenariosbased approach, in a step-by-step approach in which we would
start by a collection of scenarios. We would evaluate those
scenarios based on whether they are really real concerns for us
or not.
Then we would check whether those concerns can be addressed
by the ICANN post-transition accountability mechanisms, if
those concerns can be mitigated or fully removed by those new
mechanisms that we are setting. In case not, we would then
check for alternatives and, finally, make recommendations how
to implement those alternatives. I’ll explain this a little bit more
in detail. If we go to the next slide, please.
By scenarios, I mean to identify all areas in which jurisdictions,
not only one but maybe others as well, influence or interfere in
ICANN. Remember that we have agreed that this would be our
main broad concern. It is in our report. How does jurisdiction
influence ICANN’s operations?
Then, once we have identified all those areas where jurisdiction
influences ICANN, we would evaluate whether those areas of
influence actually do represent major concerns for us. It can be,
for example, that there is influence of a certain jurisdiction on
labor law with respect to ICANN, but this is not really a concern
for us because it is only related to employment relationship

Page 27 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

between ICANN and its staff. So maybe it’s not the real concern,
but in other cases, yes, so I think we should clarify this.
Then, once these concerns have been identified, we would then
make an accountability check. Can these concerns be addressed
by the new mechanisms we have agreed? Yes? No? If not, then
we would look for alternatives, as I said. Not only let’s say
looking for the alternatives, benchmarking them, but also see if
they are feasible, if they are implementable.
Then, finally, we would list all these alternatives and make
appropriate recommendations, including how to implement
them.
Let me give you two examples just to illustrate a little bit more
this process. If you go to the next slide.
Let’s think about government sanctions. This is one topic that
was raised in our list and also there has been some previous
[studies] on that.
There are many stakeholders who have real concerns with
government sanctions because they represent unilateral and
therefore undue interference in ICANN’s global policies and
operations. It is one scenario that really may represent a real
concern for us.

Page 28 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

We would then evaluate if ICANN with the mechanisms that
ICANN has in place, the accountability mechanisms, if ICANN can
decide not to implement a government sanction that goes
against ICANN policies, their own policies, policies that have
been developed within our community. Can ICANN ignore these
sanctions if they are against those policies? I don’t know.
Apparently not.
So we should look for alternatives. Can we, for example, have
immunity on certain types of sanctions? Can we seek for
immunity for ICANN for certain types of sanctions within the
jurisdiction where those sanctions are imposed?
I’m just giving an example here of how we should evaluate this
kind of possible interferences in ICANN’s global remit. Then we
should then go to proper recommendations.
Other examples would be the approval of new laws or acts
within the jurisdictions where ICANN operates, if these interfere
also with ICANN’s global remit, or the approval of new
regulations. If you go to the next example.
Another topic that has been mentioned, it’s in our report as well,
is the governing law for contracts between registries and ICANN.
Maybe some of you in here in this room have an answer to this,
but these questions are here put just for example.

Page 29 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Maybe if both parties, ICANN and the registries, if they can agree
on the specific governing law for their contract or specific
jurisdiction for their contract, this is not a concern. But can both
parties really choose at their own will the specific governing
law? I don’t know. Maybe. This is a concern or not.
If they cannot choose, I would say this is a concern, and then we
should evaluate if this can somehow be changed maintaining
ICANN’s current post-transition status. So it’s an evaluation we
would do. If this cannot easily change, what other alternatives
do we have? Then we would make proper recommendations.
These are two scenarios where there might be interference from
jurisdictions in ICANN’s global remit, and we should evaluate
those and see whether we have alternatives or not.
Other examples would be enforcement of IRP decisions. Can IRP
decisions be enforced just in one specific jurisdiction or in
others? I don’t know. I think it’s something to be discussed
within the group. Delegation/redelegation of ccTLDs, to what
extent can governments or a jurisdiction influence this process?
This is another possible scenario that I just give here as an
example. Going to the last slide. Sorry.
Just some comments on how this group should be organized. I
think it goes without saying that our group should be as diverse
as possible, but I think this specifically applies to this subgroup

Page 30 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

of jurisdiction given the sensitivity of this issue, sometimes also
raising sentiments of nationalism. I think this should be as
diverse as possible from stakeholder groups, also from
geographical point of view. Diversity of the rapporteurs as well. I
think we should have at least two rapporteurs in this subgroup
coming from different ACs/SOs and from different regions. I
think it would be very important.
As I said, expert legal advice is very important – I think both in
California and U.S. law and also international law – both to help
us identify how this interference of jurisdiction takes place in
ICANN and also to help us identify alternatives.
Finally, I think we should refer to the extent possible to previous
studies on this topic. I give here as an example this report on the
internationalization of ICANN that has been elaborated in the
context of the presidential strategy committee of 2009. I think
some of you have participated in that.
That’s it. I’m open for questions. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks very much, Pedro. We have a line that has formed itself.
Elliot is the first one to speak. You’re over there.

Page 31 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

ELLIOT NOSS:

EN

It wasn’t a question about this particular talk though, so I want
to defer to anything that addresses this.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Then let me just ask whether any one of those that have raised
their hands have specific questions for Pedro. Paul, please.

PAUL McGRADY:

As I’m listening to this, it sounds a bit like it’s the tail that could
undo the dog. The entire accountability infrastructure that came
out of Work Stream 1 is tied to the notion of this sole designator
model, which is novel as far as I can tell under California law.
It sounds to me like we’re going back now to say, okay, here are
other concerns and we’re going to evaluate those other
concerns to see if the current jurisdiction can address those. And
if not, then we’re going to out and find new jurisdictions that can
without addressing whether or not we’re ever going to find – and
I hope we don’t – a jurisdiction where ICANN can ignore the
government where they’re located.
My concern is that it sounds like what we’re doing is, by using
this jurisdiction issue, we’re going back to reevaluate all the
work in Work Stream 1. So I’m hoping that I’ve just
misunderstood what you’ve said and you can clarify that that’s
not what we’re really doing.

Page 32 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

The second this is just for clarity’s sake, I’d like for us to not
dance around the issue and I’d like for somebody to say that
both the issue of where ICANN is physically located and also the
choice of law for its various contracts, which is a much lesser
issue, both of those things are on the table so that when we go
back to our people who have interest in this (constituencies and
the like) that we’re able to say, “No, there’s no possibility of
ICANN being moved out of California,” or, “Yes, there is a
possibility,” just so that we all know what we’re talking about.
Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Paul. Pedro, would you like to respond?

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

Yes. Okay, thank you, Paul, for your question. This is merely a
suggestion of a process. It’s not anticipating any result. I’m not
having in mind any result. I think it’s a process that’s as flexible
as possible to cope with all the concerns that are expressed by
the community on this topic. I think it’s also important that this
process actually visages to address concerns, not overall
concerns but concerns individually, for which there can be
different solutions.

Page 33 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Also, I’d like to stress one of the items in the evaluation part of
this process, that visibility is one key value here. We need to
check when we identify alternatives if those alternatives are
feasible, if they are doable considering all restrictions that we
may have.
So I think the key message here is that we are not anticipating
anything and we should not be anticipating anything. We should
not already put limitations to our work and also not from the
start say that we will not do that and we should not do that. I
think really it’s open. I think the discussion, the debate is still
open, and I think let the subgroup come to its own conclusions.
Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Pedro. I would just like to point your attention to a
comment that has been made by [Jordan] who, as you know, is
one of the rapporteurs for the Work Stream 1 recommendations.
He said that we should make a requirement that the work of
Work Stream 1 is [inaudible] so that we’re are not using the
jurisdiction discussion or the others to amend what we have
agreed with the community in Work Stream 1. I think that’s an
important point to bear in mind.
Elliot, you have been patiently waiting so, Elliot, the floor is
yours now.

Page 34 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

ELLIOT NOSS:

EN

Thank you. I do want to – I think there’s a lot of great detail there
about approaches, and I understand that there are certainly in
the short term some limitations on jurisdiction flexibility. But I
think we should not lose sight of the most important point
around jurisdiction here.
Sorry. I’m Elliot Noss from Tucows.
I think we should not lose sight of the most important point as it
relates to jurisdiction. The people in this room almost by their
presence here impliedly are recognizing the fact that with the
Internet multistakeholderism is the most important principle.
We have seen just this week writ large that no single nation state
trusts other nation states when it comes to primacy or when it
comes to control over what is seen as key Internet
infrastructure.
When we as a community are looking for jurisdiction, again
especially in the longer term, the most important principle must
be locating in a jurisdiction that respects that primacy of
multistakeholderism. That creates in and of itself if we agree on
that point a unique challenge because prior to the formation of
ICANN and prior to the existence of the Internet, there is not
another similar example of all of the world being so intertwined
around key infrastructure. What that means is that, again by

Page 35 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

definition, no nation state has yet had the opportunity to
demonstrate that it will respect multistakeholderism over the
interests of any one nation state.
I’d say that where that leaves us with jurisdiction is we are in the
truest sense jurisdiction shopping. We, this community, are
shopping for the jurisdiction that will put up its hand and
explicitly recognize the primacy of multistakeholderism. That
doesn’t exist yet, but I suspect that if we make that call long and
loud through this process, that one or some number of countries
will step up around that.
Again, I want to circle back to what I said earlier. It is a
fundamental principle of nation states and sovereignty that no
nation state wants to be dictated to by any other. We can’t
expect in the current or past historical frame that any nation
state would have respect for something like this in
multistakeholderism. So what we’re looking for is something
that doesn’t exist today, but with our help, it’s something that
can come to exist. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Elliot. Is it just me, or was that a lightning talk?

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

It sounded like one.

Page 36 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

It was.

MATHIEU WEILL:

It was. [applause]

ELLIOT NOSS:

I’ll e-mail my slides to the list later.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks very much, Elliot. Greg?

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks. It seems to me that we use the term jurisdiction to mean
a lot of different things, and I think that creates confusion.
Maybe they all fall under some broad umbrella that we can call
jurisdiction for some purposes, but I think referring to all of
these separate things as jurisdiction is not enlightening but
rather confusing. A non-exhaustive list that I came up with was
the country of incorporation and in the U.S., the state of
incorporation, the physical locations of the headquarters and
the physical locations of any other offices or activities. That’s
just the domicile, if you will, of ICANN. The choice of law for
contracts, the places where ICANN can be sued, places where
ICANN itself can sue, the law that applies to ICANN as a

Page 37 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

corporation which is tied to the country and state of
incorporation. That’s a non-exhaustive list.
I think we’d be better off not calling all of those things
jurisdiction even if we think they’re all somehow under this Work
Stream 2 topic as words matter and making it all sound like it’s
all one ball of wax, I think, is unhelpful and really actually
incorrect.
In terms of a couple of the specific things that came up in
Pedro’s talk, one scenario referred to government sanctions. As
far as I define a government sanction, it’s a tool that’s used by a
country or perhaps by an IGO to persuade other governments to
change their policy by restricting what they do. So unless there’s
some other definition of government sanctions that is different, I
don’t see where ICANN, where that issue comes from unless
we’re talking about the fact that ICANN’s currently physically
located in a jurisdiction that has government sanctions against,
say, North Korea. So I’m not sure where that all fits in or if that is
alluding to an issue that bubbles up which is the idea of
influence or interference of the government. And there’s a lot of
fudd around that concept of interference.
Some people would like to define the very idea that ICANN can
be called into a particular court to be the interference of the
government that maintains that court. So I think there are a lot

Page 38 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

of terms that are thrown around and I think we need to be much
more consistent with use of terms and also, I think, avoid kind of
rhetorical mischaracterizations of both topics and what people
are trying to say.
And frankly, even kind of spreading of some what I believe to be
fairy tales about jurisdictions and what can happen due to either
place of incorporation, domicile, choice of law, vulnerability to
suit, and applicable law of the corporation. And I would not call
all of those jurisdiction and I would urge the group to follow
that. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Greg. And looking at the queue, you’ve
obviously warmed up to the discussion now. And let me close
the queue after Farzaneh so that we have time to squeeze in for
Corwin should he come to the room. Have we heard from
[inaudible]? Just want to make sure that we give him the
opportunity to speak.
Next in line is Mathieu.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Page 39 of 262

Thank you very much, Thomas.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

I have a couple of very practical questions for Pedro on the
process. Sorry to bring things back down to Earth here.
The first question is that my understanding of the [inaudible]
approach is that it’s extremely similar to what we did with the
Stress Test approach. Do you think we could be using the same
type of framework?
And the second question is about the reliance on experts, legal
experts and international law experts. Do you also believe that
in terms of international law experts, we should reach out to the
public experts group experts that joined our effort in Work
Stream 1 or were you thinking of other experts?

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

Yes, thank you Mathieu. I still have a little bit of a trauma with
Stress Test, the name Stress Test. I prefer not to use it.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Post-traumatic stress disorder.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Call it Scenario Test, so it’s ST.

Page 40 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

EN

But yeah, the concept is similar. It’s about identifying, let’s say,
used cases, scenarios that we would individually, case by case,
investigate and then make proper recommendations based on
them.
And then on the experts group, I think specifically on
international law, I think private international law, I think is one
aspect which is related to the conflict of laws and the choice of,
let’s say, the governing law for a relationship between private
entities that belong to different nations. I think that particular
expertise is what we need. And I think it’s one of our experts, I
think, has his expertise in this area so I think definitely this
would be one, let’s say, area that one person will definitely
contribute a lot to our work. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Just to put your mind at ease, should we have more than 15
Stress Tests, we will make sure that the numbering is 15, 16, 17,
19, 20 and onwards. Next is David, please.

DAVID MCAULEY:

Thank you, Thomas. I, too, have a question for Pedro.
First of all, Pedro, thank you for your lightning talk and thank
you for your slides. My question, and I agree with Mathieu – it
looks like the Stress Test – but under whatever term, when you

Page 41 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

develop a scenario and then you subsequently develop
alternatives, are the alternatives that you float, are they also
subject to the scenarios or the Stress Test as well as they’re
considered? Thank you.

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

Yes. I think that all the alternatives that we come up with, I think
definitely need to, let’s say, comply with what we have agreed so
far both in Work Stream 1 and let’s say all the limitations and all
the constraints we have agreed within the group. So I think that
goes without saying that definitely there needs to be, let’s say,
subject to all those, let’s say, concerns that we have expressed
within the group and agreed that would represent real concerns
for us. Yes.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much. Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. I just want to make a comment on something I think
Paul said a very long time ago. I have now forgotten. That the
implication of a change of jurisdiction with the Empowered
Community that we have created, that indeed, at least as I
understand it, if we were to consider a changed jurisdiction, we
either need to find a construct comparable to what we’re using

Page 42 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

under California statutes or we need to redo the work again.
Let’s be candid about it. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks Alan. Vidushi?

VIDUSHI MARDA:

I’m from the Center for Internet and Society. I had a question
with respect to the approach that you propose. And specifically,
my question is how do you account for the fact that the draft
new ICANN Bylaws implicitly assume that the jurisdiction will be
in California? And I say that because there are repeated
references to the California Civil Court, there are repeated
references to entities that are only found in California, and I’d be
interested to hear how you would fit that into your process.
Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Question for Pedro, right?

PEDRO IVO SILVA:

Thank you, Vidushi, for the question. Again, I’d like to stress that
we are not here, let’s say, anticipating any results. And we are
building on work that has been already done. This is very
important to bear in mind.

Page 43 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

And also, as Greg mentioned and hopefully, let’s say, I made
myself clear in the presentation, I think jurisdiction is a very
multi-faceted issue. It’s not about only the fact that ICANN is
incorporated in California but has other aspects as well like the
example I gave on the, let’s say, governing law for contracts. So
it’s lots of issues that need to be first, let’s say, filtered out, let’s
say, what is feasible, what is, let’s say, can be done and what is a
real concern. And then we should really cope with this, address
those topics individually, case by case.
So it’s important that we don’t anticipate and then reconsider
that jurisdiction is not only about the place of incorporation of
ICANN but has many other aspects as well. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks, Pedro. Sebastien?

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Thank you very much. I would like to thank Elliott for
enlightening no lightning talk. And I would like to support this
questioning. I want to say that almost two years ago, seven and
41 days as Twitter says, I write a private mail to [Soto], tweet to
our French government State Secretary for Digital and after she
was talking about the need for a transfer of the ICANN
headquarter and I was asking her if France, maybe Europe, but

Page 44 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

you see where we are, can offer a specific statute to welcome
organization like ours with multi-stakeholder organization and
there is no such things existing under other jurisdictions and it
could be interesting way to think about it. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks, Sebastien. Jorge?

JORGE CANCIO:

Hello. Good morning to everybody. I just wanted to go back
perhaps to a more procedural level and also to state or to point
out that in the two official, so to say, lightning talks we had,
there are many common elements I think because if you look at
what Jordan said and what Pedro has proposed, I think that’s a
good way to avoid talking about jurisdiction in general as a
theoretical or a metaphysical issue, but to go into really what
are the concerns, what are the problems. Perhaps they are
perceived problems. Or to what extent they are real problems or
not. For instance, in the Registry Agreement, we have different
options already. But perhaps we need to boil that down even
further and see, okay, is this enough? Are there still concerns
from the community or not?
So I like very much that approach of, okay, let’s talk about very
specific things, but specific concerns, specific scenarios, these

Page 45 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

different facets or aspects of jurisdiction as a whole, but stick to
those specific issues and to have a fact-based approach with
neutral objective expert support which may enlighten us on
what are the real facts of these different scenarios.
And on that basis, perhaps we are able to have a discussion on
what would be the requirements to address those concerns
once we know whether these concerns are real or not or to what
extent. And on those requirements, we may reach agreement or
not already because that’s less a fact-based issue but also a
question of opinion. And then, the last step would, of course, be
to make recommendations or perhaps on the level of agreement
is lower. But perhaps, in any case, there might be some common
ideas where we may nevertheless agree as a group.
And as a last point, I also wanted to share with you all that I very
much agree with the idea and we have put this also to in
different forums that we need to make sure that we have a
diversity in the sub-group that will lead this work. We need to
make sure that this group represents us as much as possible, the
overall community. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Page 46 of 262

Thanks very much. Lyman?

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LYMAN CHAPIN:

EN

Thank you, yes. Lyman Chapin with SSAC. Wanted to make a
point and ask a question that’s related to something that Pedro
just said, expanding on his lightning talk. Because of the role
that I play in this group, I spend a lot of time explaining what the
group is about to a bunch of other folks, in particular, the SSAC
folks. And a concern I’ve got arises from that.
When we talk about jurisdiction, my sense is that as Pedro has
said, we’re talking about a variety of different things but they
seem to be things that are of two types. There’s jurisdiction that
has to do with where ICANN is incorporated and the laws under
which it operates and the way in which it might or might not be
constrained in what it can legally do based on the jurisdiction in
which it, itself, operates as a corporation.
That has a lot of aspects that, in my cases, most of the time that
is spent talking about them is time spent by people who are not
experts in the relevant law and we end up going down many,
many rat holes when we have those kinds of discussions. We
eventually manage. I think we’ve done a good job of crawling
out of them eventually. But it’s a painful process.
There is a very different set of issues surrounding jurisdiction
when we use the term to refer to the jurisdiction that ICANN
itself establishes as what amounts to a regulator in the domain
name space. And I understand that the term “regulator” is

Page 47 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

freighted in ways that make it probably not the right word to use
and we shouldn’t be talking about it as a regulator but, in fact, it
operates that way.
So there are certain kinds of disputes that we expect will be
brought to ICANN as opposed to some other body. There are
disagreements between ICANN and other international and
multinational organizations about who has jurisdiction over
certain aspects of Internet behavior and Internet infrastructure.
Those seem to me to be obviously related to the jurisdiction
within which ICANN operates as an organization.
But ICANN establishes its own jurisdiction within which it
expects that certain kinds of issues and contract disputes and
other questions will be brought. And I’d be interested, in order to
reflect this properly back to at least, in my case, the SSAC folks,
it would be very useful to know if this Work Stream 2 topic is
going to limit itself to just the issue of where should we
incorporate ICANN or if we’re also interested in how to establish
the terms of jurisdiction for ICANN as what amounts to a
regulatory body within the Internet ecosystem. Thanks.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks, Lyman. We can for sure that this is not limited to the
location of ICANN.

Page 48 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

With respect to the other topic or whether or not ICANN should
be a regulator, I think you rightfully pointed out that this is a
term that is not used so much, so that’s going to be up for
discussion, but [may be] a little bit challenging.
You will remember that I had closed the queue after Farzaneh.
She got disconnected as she wrote in the chat. She is now back
online so we’re now going to hear Farzaneh and I would like to
ask those that have raised their hands afterwards to be patient.
We might get back to the jurisdiction topic if and when we get
Pril Corwin in the room for his lightning talk. But I would
definitely like to keep some time for Niels’s talk on human rights
before we break. Farzaneh, please.

FARZANEH BADIEI:

Thank you. I am going to just make a comment on what Greg
was posing as the government sanction, whether government
sanction is a matter of jurisdiction, if we should talk about it.
I don’t know if the group is going to decide that government
sanction is a matter of jurisdiction. We are going to talk about it
in jurisdiction. But I would like to say that as a matter, the case
of the .IR that happened, it’s brought up [inaudible].

Page 49 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

THOMAS RICKERT:

EN

Audio should be back. Farzaneh, can you please restart your
intervention?

FARZANEH BADIEI:

Okay. So the case of the .IR brought a lot of uncertainty to Iran
and Iranian users of their domain. And obviously, we have to
have mechanisms in place to avoid that. ccTLDs and gTLDs are
critical Internet resources. We also have sanctions against Iran
and other countries for new gTLDs. Iran had to get an OFAC
license to apply for. And when I say “Iran”, I do not mean the
government of Iran. I mean people, private sector, NGOs. The
ones that want to get a new gTLD have to get an OFAC license
and that causes a lot of complications. If that’s not jurisdiction,
what is it? If ICANN can be sued because it has not complied with
a sanction law or a write-off attachment for attaching ccTLD to
some people, so what is it? Okay, thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Farzaneh. Let me try to recap a few points
that have been mentioned. First of all, let’s confirm the scoping
of the issue as mentioned in our Work Stream 1 report, and that
refers primarily to the process for a settlement of disputes
within ICANN involving the choice of jurisdiction and the
applicable laws but not necessarily the location where ICANN is
incorporated.

Page 50 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

So we’ve acknowledged and we should go on record with that
one more time that the jurisdiction issue should not be limited
to the question of incorporation or location. In fact, you will
remember that ICANN being incorporated as an organization in
California is in articles of cessation and that has fundamental
Bylaw status. So that’s the status quo.
Also, for those that have been there when we discussed this
early in Work Stream 1, we’ve always made very clear that we
want an accountability framework that works. And we have
been

able

to

operationalize

the

Work

Stream

1

recommendations under Californian law so we haven’t seen any
limitations to those requirements that the community
established being operationalized.
And therefore, the other point that’s been made was whether we
should limit the jurisdiction discussion to points that would not
revise or reopen the recommendations that we had in Work
Stream 1.
Also, we should probably rethink the language that we’re using
because

there’s

so

much

confusion

about

the

word

“jurisdiction” to be misunderstood for being location or place of
incorporation only. So maybe we should just give it a different
name in order to take away the potential for confusion.

Page 51 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Also, the idea of working on a requirements basis and then
Stress Test that, although we might not use the word “stress
test” in that regard. It could be a methodology that we could
apply in this case.
So I would suggest that we leave it there for the moment. I’m
sure that Phil, whom we’ve tried to reach out to join our work
during the day so that we can come back to the jurisdiction topic
for his lightning talk and a little bit more discussion. So with
that, I’d like to thank you all for a very interesting kickoff of this
debate on jurisdiction or whatever we might call it going
forward. And now it’s Niels’s turn to do the first lightning talk on
human rights. So Niels, would you like to join us at the top table
so that you can better interact with the group?
Thanks very much, Pedro, for your lightning talk and responding
to all the questions that were brought up.

NIELS TEN OEVER:

Thanks, Thomas. Great to see you all. We’ve come a long way.
And we have done a lot of work since 1948, the year that the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights drafted by a committee
under lead of Eleanor Roosevelt was adopted by the UN General
Assembly.

Page 52 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

We have come a long way and have done a lot of work since the
2005 Tunis Agenda as it was formulated during the World
Summit on Information Societies where it was first said we must
protect and respect the provisions for privacy and freedom of
expression as contained in the relevant parts of the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights.
We have come an even longer way and we have done even more
work since the NETmundial Declaration in 2014 which said that
human rights are universal as reflected in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights and that they should underpin
Internet governance principles. It also reaffirmed that the
human rights that people have online must also be protected
online.
We all know all too well the long way we have come and the
work we have done since we started on Work Stream 1. Working
through the human rights tax in Working Party 4, but also taking
on the enormous opportunity of showing the world that multistakeholder governance works resulting in a consensus in the
CCWG and approval by the NCIA.
So here we are now at the beginning of Work Stream 2 with a
legacy and an opportunity. Our most important legacy being the
human rights Bylaw, the commitment to respect human rights in
the ICANN Bylaw and the true spirit of constructive discussion

Page 53 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

and collaboration in a multi-stakeholder manner. Our
opportunity being the development of a framework of
interpretation to operationalize ICANN’s commitment to respect
human rights and create a clear perspective on ICANN’s way
forward to live up to this commitment.
In order to do so, we need to understand how ICANN impacts
human rights. The Cross-Community Working Party on ICANN’s
corporate and social responsibility to respect human rights has
been doing some initial scoping to this end. And this slide, which
is maybe a bit low resolution for here, you can also find at
ICANNHumanRights.net.
Our scoping efforts included through research into the
development of human rights. We looked at the UN guiding
principles for business and human rights which have been
implemented by large IT companies. And at the specific sector
guide for the ICT sector as well as the latest report by the UN
Special Rapporteur on freedom of expression, David Kaye, on
the role of the private sector in the Digital Age.
Luckily, there have been people before us in ICANN who have
been working on frameworks of interpretation, notably the
CCNSO. We are drawing upon their work as well. So luckily, there
is no need for us to reinvent the wheel or come up with exotic
constructions. We do not need to develop a human rights policy

Page 54 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

nor do we need to develop specific human rights instruments for
ICANN. We just need to explain what is meant by the language in
the Bylaw. That is the task at hand.
We cannot copy-paste an existing human rights instrument and
apply it as a framework of interpretation for the human rights
Bylaw. ICANN’s unique mission, history and structure calls for
development of a very specific approach, tailored to just its
purpose. That is what we will be working on in the upcoming
weeks and months. Our own deadlines urge us to ensure that
this domain will not become years. When the framework of
interpretation is done, ICANN and the ICANN community should
have a clear road ahead to live up to its commitments and their
core values.
We have a lot to build on. We can stand on the shoulders of
giants, giants of the past and also present in the room right now.
Together we can continue to band the long arc of history
towards a rights-enabling Internet. With that said, let the work
on the framework of interpretation commence and let’s boldly
go where no woman or man has gone before.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Niels. And the previous slide, it actually
looked like there’s a very long way to go.

Page 55 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

NIELS TEN OEVER:

We go very fast.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Are there any questions for Niels? Kavouss, I’m not sure whether
that’ s an old hand or a new hand. Old hand? Mathieu has a
question. Please.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Yes, Niels. Thank you very much for this very lightning talk and
very entertaining set of slides as well. Actually, that was the
perfect set-up for the conversation.
My question is related to the human rights working party. I’m
losing the names, but how do you see the interlink between the
sub-group of the Work Stream 2 accountability and this existing
group that I know you’re very familiar with as well? How would
you see this? Is it corporation? Is this actually the same people
getting on board as well? I think we will need to be getting some
clarity about roles and the responsibilities here to avoid
duplication but also confusion about who is doing what.

NIELS TEN OEVER:

So, of course, we do not want to duplicate. But we do want to
ensure that there are synergies. And I think what is crucial to

Page 56 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

remind ourselves of is that the Cross-Community Working Party
is not a formal ICANN working body. We cannot make decisions
there.
So we set it up to understand the scope and coordinate the issue
and understand how it impacts our work here in Work Stream 2
but also in the PDPs, so see it more as a congregation of minds
to map issues and to provide input and maybe some
coordination. But the real work on Work Stream 2 is done here in
the CCWG Work Stream 2 and in the Design Team. There should
be no unclarity about that.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Actually, I do have a question for you as well, which is sort of a
follow-up on what Mathieu’s been asking. Just to get all of us on
the same page, I understand that you’ve done a lot of ground
work in analyzing what areas need to be looked at when looking
at the impact of ICANN in the human rights arena.
So have you been looking at the different constituent parts of
the ICANN community, i.e. GNSO, CCNSO policy making and the
like, as well as the way ICANN the corporation functions, let’s say
with its label law aspects that might have a human rights
aspect? Or do we get the holistic view with that analysis already
so that we could take that and work through it to see what else
is needed?

Page 57 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

NIELS TEN OEVER:

EN

Well, it’s only a holistic view if we together agree it’s a holistic
view. But we have done some initial scoping of the instruments
with which we can look at things like different filters. So the UN
guiding principles for business and human rights provide us with
the instrument of a human rights impact assessment and we
have been looking at initial steps for that. And I should very
clearly indicate it is easier to do that impact assessment for
ICANN the company than for the community and the policy
making process. But we have been analyzing how this can be
done and that is documented on the reports on the
ICANNHumanRights.net website and I think those documents
and reports could provide an input or a setting of the stage for
the discussion in the design team.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks, Niels. Any more questions for Niels? So that’s Greg.
Greg, please go ahead.

GREG SHATAN:

Thanks. I’m not sure if my hand is up because my connectivity
got lost here. And I can present my thoughts here rather than
having to do a whole lightning talk, especially because I have no
terrible experiments gone wrong in trying to mate a

Page 58 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

hummingbird with a car or anything like that. So I’d rather just
take it from here.
I agree with a lot of what Niels has said and think it provides a
very good platform for considering our work. It is important to
note that we’re putting together a framework of interpretation
and not a framework of implementation for structures and
documents. This is the platform upon which things like that will
be built, sets the stage for other activities in years to come by
ICANN and by ICANN structures like working groups and CrossCommunity Working Groups.
I do think it’s important to focus on the full panoply of human
rights and not nearly cherry-pick. There was one mention along
the way there of privacy and freedom of expression which I
caution against us focusing on those and those alone. But
rather, looking at the full panoply of human rights and how they
all interact and what their effects are on what ICANN does. I
think we lose some legitimacy and credibility if we try to narrow
this in a way that kind of seems to meet the needs of certain
groups as opposed to focusing on the concept of human rights.
I would also say that we need to look to all prior inputs including
inputs from any stakeholder group. As Niels noted, the Cross
Community Working Party on Human Rights is an informal
group not chartered by any organization, is basically a GNSO

Page 59 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

NCSG activity with some others pitching in. So inputs need to be
taken as such. So we don’t want to redo work, but on the other
hand, we can’t just adopt work without the group itself, as Niels
noted, deciding how to adopt it, how to work with it. Anything
we can do to work relatively quickly because I think if we avoid
mission [creed], we get this done in the time it needs to get
done, then we have an active Bylaw and we can work with it as
such. If we get stuck in rat holes or other such places, we’re
doing nobody any favors because we don’t get to where we go
until we get a framework that is broadly agreed. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Greg. Greg, you have volunteered to do a
lightning talk. I understand this was your lightning talk or shall
we reserve more time for you?

GREG SHATAN:

No, that was it. As I said, I don’t have any good slides. I don’t
have any good jokes, so this is as good as I’ll get. Thanks.

THOMAS RICKERT:

No, it was great actually. I just wanted to make sure in terms of
time requirements that we don’t bite into our coffee break. So
Niels, would you like to respond to that?

Page 60 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

NIELS TEN OEVER:

Yeah, I can happily say that I agree with Greg and I think also as
in quite a lot of work has been going into the visualization you
just saw of the different processes, how they link up to rights.
And part of what’s mentioned there are the human rights
principles and [inaudible] also said that human rights are
interrelated, universal, and interdependent. So as we have said
in Working Party 4, we cannot cherry-pick human rights. We
need to understand how the whole framework works and how
we balance the different rights. And for that, we need to come
up with a method. But luckily, we can draw upon experience. We
do not need to reinvent the wheel. So I am greatly looking
forward to working with you all on this.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks

very

much,

Niels.

Anymore

questions?

I

was

disconnected from the Adobe. So Mark, please.

MARK CARVELL:

Yes, thank you. Good morning, everybody, and thank you, Niels,
for that lightning introduction. That was very entertaining and I
think very much to the point and the purpose of this particular
topic.

Page 61 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

And sorry, introduction, Mark Carvell, United Kingdom
government. I’m one of the co-Chairs of the GAC Working Group
on Human Rights and very much in the spirit of providing timely
inputs into this process for this sub-group, the GAC Working
Group will be discussing at this meeting here in Helsinki how we
should prioritize the framework interpretation for the human
rights Bylaw as in our action plan so that we hit the ground
running, we can get inputs from governments in consultation
with the informal Cross-Community Working Party and within
the structure of the sub-group for this topic. So we will hit the
ground running, I hope, and we will hopefully get to the core
issues in a very timely and efficient way. I hope that’s helpful.
Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks so much. That’s very encouraging. Just to let you know,
the queue is closed after Brett. But now let’s move to Tatiana,
Kavouss, and then Brett.

TATIANA TROPINA:

Thanks to Niels and Greg for very good talks. And I wanted to
address one point which Greg raised and which I totally agree
with. Though I’m a part of Cross Community Working Group, I
believe that these two, the Work Stream 2 Group on Human
Rights and Cross Community Working Group shall be separated

Page 62 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

because this exercise on developing our framework of
interpretation shall be the exercise of Cross-Community Working
Group. Of course, some people would be in two groups but I
believe that Cross-Community Working Party on Human Rights,
we are analyzing different spectrum of issues, not only related to
Work Stream 2 and we are just coming to the CCWG
accountability with our knowledge.
But I believe that we don’t own anything and, of course, we do
not want to duplicate the job. But we also don’t want to, you
know, promote only our views or our ideas and I totally agree
with Greg that if it’s NCUC or non-commercial dominated, yes, it
has to be taken as such and just one point of view, just one
aspect. So I believe that there is no duplication and these two
shall be separated but, of course, there is some synergy in that.
Thanks.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Tatiana. Kavouss?

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. I think it is good to have so many brilliant people with
brilliant ideas. Good to listen to all of them, but we have limited
time and we have to see what are possible to do and what is
manageable to do within the timeframe mentioned by Mathieu

Page 63 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

at the beginning of the meeting. We should not convert CCWG to
an institute of research for human rights nor an institute of
research for jurisdiction. Two people mentioned before me that
we have to find or identify areas we have problems and try to
see whether we have any solution for those problems only.
Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Kavouss. Brett?

BRETT SCHAEFER:

Thank you. I’m looking over the chart. It’s a very interesting
chart. I do notice a bit of a discrepancy here. You go from very
specific to very broad. For instance, there’s a right to privacy, a
right to freedom of association and then there’s a group of rights
called economic, social and cultural rights. Then at the bottom,
you have participation, inclusion, equality, non-discrimination.
These are very broad categories and they contrast quite sharply
with the very defined rights that you’ve identified in other parts
of this document. The more that you define what we’re talking
about, I think the more successful we’re going to be in trying to
figure out where the end result is going to arrive.
I also note that some of the discussions here – for instance, free
and fair use of all domain names, the right to use all words and

Page 64 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

names in domain names – that’s also being covered in some
other working groups. How are you looking to coordinate with
those ongoing efforts in your process so as not to preclude the
conclusions of those other working groups? Thanks.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Yes?

NIELS TEN OEVER:

So actually, this was exactly done to ensure that we will not start
to do the work of other parts of the community here. But we
should be very aware of the impact ICANN has on human rights,
the work that’s going on in other parts of the community to
ensure that we do not duplicate and also to ensure that there
will be no incongruencies with different parts. So I think what is
important is first to have the high level overview of what’s going
on where, so starting with the scoping and the mapping. But
then also really quickly going back to make it really narrow what
is the scope in Work Stream 2 because it is not the development
of a policy. It’s explaining what we meant with the Bylaw, the
framework of interpretation, nothing more, nothing less.
So I think based on that and based on your remarks which I
completely agree, we should have it clear what’s going on
outside and what we should be doing on our part.

Page 65 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

THOMAS RICKERT:

EN

Thanks very much, Niels. Now before we break for coffee, let’s
just briefly recap. I guess it’s become clear that human rights is a
very broad topic, that we need to stay focused on all the aspects
that are relevant to ICANN. We should, as much as we can, build
on previous work, recognizing that the other working group has
its distinct scope and that it may only be partially usable for our
purposes.
Our job is to come up with recommendations that feed into
language for a framework of interpretation and not a framework
of implementation as Greg put it. And we should, therefore,
avoid mission [creed], particularly given the time that we have
available for accomplishing this task.
So I guess that with that, we should break for coffee. Thank you
to the remote participants as well. Should you have questions,
we will go back to you after the coffee break so that you can
make interventions that you would like to make. And let’s
reconvene in 15 minutes. Thank you. Thanks to Niels.
[BREAK]
Hello? This is a two-minute warning so we’re going to reconvene
in two minutes. Please be seated.

Page 66 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Is Siva in the room? Siva? If Siva is in the room, we would like to
invite you to the table so that we can hear your lightning talk
from here. Now the audio for the whole room is working. That’s
great. So we will start in a few seconds. If Siva is in the room,
Siva, can you please come to the top table for your lightning
talk? So please be seated. We will start momentarily.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

All right. So welcome back. We’ll continue with the

lightning talks now. We had scheduled for Sivasubramanian to
speak on guidelines for standards of conduct. But I don’t see
Siva in the room nor in the Adobe Connect room. So I guess we
need to move on and, therefore, the next lightning talk will be
provided by Cheryl Landon-Orr on Diversity.
And may I remind you to please mute your speakers and your
computers. Cheryl, you have the floor.

CHERYL LANDON-ORR:

Thank you very much, Leon. I’m the token female other than the
staff here at the table. Interesting – isn’t it? – when we’re talking
about diversity. I couldn’t help myself saying that. I also thought
it was amusing that when we looked at the three people to talk
about diversity, we had two French males and me. But that’s

Page 67 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

strange. That’s fine. Do go on, please. Take the floor, Sebastien.
We can interrupt. No? Okay, well when we get to Q&A.
Why I’m saying that tongue in cheek is while most of us, I trust,
would agree that diversity matters and in ICANN what we mean
by diversity, first of all, needs to be defined and discussed and
agreed upon. It’s not actually as simple as it seems. Aspirational
work, aspirational goals, concepts and matters upon which we
would like to see the outcomes of the diversity are probably, one
would think, fairly easy and perhaps even a mathematical
formula that we can look at. Yeah, something along equitable
lines.
So if you have a particular leadership team, let us assume I could
use the At-Large Advisory Committee as an example. We have 15
people who serve in ICANN in this role of the At-Large Advisory
Committee and they are by design, for example, geographically
balanced. The committee had the good luck and benefit of being
designed to have equitable representation from the geographic
regions as ICANN defines geographic regions.
But there are still other matters of diversity that need to be
addressed. Historically, we’ve waxed and waned around
unequitable balance between the genders. We often have
almost a two-third, one-third ratio. But that very rarely has

Page 68 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

survived more than a 12- to 18-month term. So there seems to
be almost a natural selection thing that is happening.
But part of that is because of how that particular group is
appointed. For each of the five regions – and I’m taking you
through this example somewhat laboriously because it’s
hopefully going to show you we need to have a deep
conversation and come to agreed terms because it’s not as
simple as it first sounds. For these five regions, two members of
the At-Large Advisory Committee are appointed by the
leadership and membership of the geographic region as
identified as At-Large Structures and Regional At-Large
Organizations. So they are coming from our own, ourselves, our
obviously interested individuals.
The third comes from a Nominating Committee appointment. All
of these roles are two year terms and they are staggered so that
different regions are refreshed, one year on, one year off, and
the Nominating Committee also does its refresh rates in a simple
way.
That rebalancing of gender that I described to you has almost
always – in fact, I would suggest has always come to the
NomCom to fix. Now that’s a concern. Right? We really shouldn’t
be looking at having efforts to make particular diversity
balances appointed and then some other group having to only

Page 69 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

appoint people from emerging and developing economies or
only appoint people from a particular gender or only appoint
people from a particular geographic location because that’s all
that’s left in the slots.
That worries me deeply because what I want to see in our
diversity puddle in an efficient and successful and energetic
entity where we are looking at the variety of voice that we want
to look at, want to engage with and we want to discuss, is
actually a system where expertise does come into play,
experience does come into play, but there is a clear and
absolute commitment to making sure we build up, support,
nurture, and bring more people with greater diversity
backgrounds to the level of experiences that are needed.
We should have, as is happening in the Scandic Park Hotel for
the first time here today. We have the Next Generation Network
Group, we have the Fellowship Group, and we have a mentoring
program which is looking at an onboarding and support system
in each of the component parts of ICANN for people who wish to
take on greater roles and have greater influence in those
sections. Now, that’s the type of thing that I think will create a
greater grouping, a greater number, and a greater diversity in
those we get to appoint and choose from these critical roles.

Page 70 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Diversity is a hot topic. But each part of ICANN is very likely to
have very specific greater and lesser interests in what they are
calling diversity. The ccNSO community, as an example, one of
their key diversities is already in the ccNSO member base and
making sure there is a balance with the non-ccNSO member
base. So their interests in appointments and consideration of
who is sent to do what sort of jobs often has to consider, “Do we
have not just ccNSO members here but do we also have ccNSO
operators who are not members here as well?” That’s a vital
piece of diversity to them and should, and probably always will,
trump other diversity interests.
So when we do our conversation on our diversity work, we are
going to have to look at some agreed interpretations on what it
means for each of our component parts. We’re going to have to
look at what is desirable, what’s possible, and what’s actually
implementable, and how we may need to start some baseline
work to make sure that the quality and diversity of people we
have to pull on to do these jobs is representation as we would
like to see it. And I suspect that is balanced and allowing a time
and a place for all voices to be facilitated. That’s it from me.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Cheryl. Now I would like to open

the floor for comments or questions on this particular lightning

Page 71 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

talk. And I see Alan Greenberg’s hand is up so Alan, could you
please take the floor?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. Cheryl, I think you ended with something that’s
really important. As important as diversity is in selecting people
for particular roles, the pool we have to select from is really the
core issue.
In any given selection, each of us have a responsibility to the
group representing to pick someone who is going to do a really,
really good job on our behalf whether it’s the NomCom picking
people for a position or At-Large picking someone for a CCWG.
We’ve all seen examples of selections that worked less optimally
than we have imagined and whether those selections were
made for diversity reasons or other [ill] something reasons, it
doesn’t really matter. But the pool is what we have to work with
and until we have a decent pool in many of our areas where we
don’t right now, we’re never going to do a good job and it is not
fair to the individual organizations to be told, “You must satisfy
diversity rules” when that implies to them they might not be
serving themselves very well by picking the wrong candidate. So
it comes down to the overall pool and ICANN attracting people,
not just the individual sub-groups. Thank you.

Page 72 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

CHERYL LANDON-ORR:

EN

Alan, if I may, that’s something that has resonated with the work
that has been done in the Nominating Committee for a couple of
years now where there has been – let’s just talk about one
aspect of diversity here – gender diversity, where there has been
an intentional outreach program by the Nominating Committee
over several years to engage with various women on board in
leadership of women groups internationally to get more people
to put in their applications. And if you look at the statistics that
are published each year, which I know is hardly the most
exciting bedtime reading, but what the Nominating Committee
does put out is interesting and those interested in metrics and
analyzing things should be able to see over the years significant
improvement.
Of course, it’s significant improvement in the number of
applications received. We’re getting better in that balance.
What’s not happening is once the first triaging is done, we drop
just rapidly the gender diversity. So when it comes to interview,
we may, in fact, have a highly imbalanced set of people to
appoint from. So that’s where we need to get what’s coming in,
what’s being filtered through, what is being successful. That all
needs to improve.

Page 73 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

There’s a light at the end of the tunnel. I don’t think it’s going to
happen. But it doesn’t happen with the flip of a switch. Very
strong bits of work are being done to improve that. That’s just in
one place.
But because you’ve got your regional diversity on, for example,
the ICANN board, you may have three wonderful women that
interview, but if they all come from a particular geographic
region, which doesn’t have a place to put them on the board, it’s
a problem. You can only appoint one if there’s only one space.
So even getting through such a situation as the Nominating
Committee process doesn’t necessarily mean that the
appointments will be able to match with the talent pool.
Go ahead, Alan.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Just a one sentence follow-on. As long as we’re not going to
lower our standards to meet the needs of diversity, I’m happy
with it. It’s unfortunate that what you describe is what’s being
seen. But standards are really important. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you, Alan. I’m closing the queue with Avri. So I’d

like to encourage everyone to be as concrete as possible. Next
on the queue, I have James Gannon. James?

Page 74 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

JAMES GANNON:

Thanks, Leon. So Cheryl, I totally agree with you.

CHERYL LANDON-ORR:

I hope you do.

JAMES GANNON:

I know. So I think you’ve made the point in a very, very
intelligent way. I don’t think the problem here is gender quotas
or diversity quotas. I think the problem with diversity at ICANN is
that we don’t attract a large enough pool of people. And I think
that’s, being brutally honest, I think that’s a failure of every one
of us here. I don’t think we’ve made enough effort in that area.
You know, I think that there is no argument that there are people
from every region on the Earth and from every potential gender
on the Earth out there with the skills and the experience that we
need in this room and we need on every single working group in
ICANN.
One of the things we talk about is all of our volunteer burnout,
and that’s linked into the same thing: we’re not attracting a wide
enough and varied enough talent pool. While I don’t think it
necessarily comes very easily from just having a wider pool, I
think we need to be bringing people in from a wider range of

Page 75 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

backgrounds and a wider range of experience, and we need to
show them how ICANN works.
As somebody who came into ICANN I suppose relatively recently
compared to many others, we’re terrible at it. You know, you get
people and they arrive at Fellowship, they arrive at NextGen, and
even in those, which are targeted programs to bring people in,
we have massive attrition rates. You know, we need to look at
how we are bringing people in, we need to look at how we are
cultivating that talent which is out there, and from that, we can
then have a pool of people with which to build our diversity.
Because as Alan said – and I thought his last point was very
good, diversity for diversity’s sake and losing talent because of
that, if we have people who we want to put onto ALAC, we want
to put onto GNSO Council, we want to put onto the Board, and
we’re losing those people because of diversity quotas, that’s
something that I don’t agree with, because then we’re losing
people that we need in ICANN. We need to build on what we
have, we need a lot of work in that area. I don’t think it
necessarily falls to just ICANN to do that.
I saw Jean Jacques downstairs, I think GSE, they look at a wide
range of people there. They’re not targeting anybody in
particular.

Page 76 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

I think it’s the ICANN community that needs to do that,
particularly those such as yourself, who have been around here
for a long time. We need to look at how when we bring people
into ICANN, how we keep them here. We have lots of people who
show up to an ICANN meeting and never show up to one after
that ever again. We need to work out how to fix that. I think
that’s one of the key things to increasing the diversity that we
need within the organization.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

If I may, James, even I agree absolutely, so this is a watershed
moment, ladies and gentlemen. James and I agree absolutely on
something, and that’s not a bad thing, but we are fixing and
remodeling this airplane while we’re flying it, so we need to
watch how we implement and how we focus on things in a very
planned and able to be actively and intelligently pursued. Just
bringing in models and aspirational things may not necessarily
be the answer.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much James and Cheryl. Next on the

queue, I have Kavouss.

Page 77 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

Yes, thank you. Diversity has many, many dimensions and so on,
so forth. The first and top and the most important, gender
diversity. Gender balance, gender equality, no one is against
that. It is internationally agreed, and in fact, there’s no one who
dare to be acting against that. Otherwise, there’s no [Tinder] at
all. Or there is a problem, so people agree with that.
But the other issue is how to implement that. Not gender
balance, how to implement the diversity. What are the criterias?
Contributions, expertise, devotions, geographical distributions
and so on and so forth. Could they have one criteria to apply?
Could we have a combined criteria to apply?
This is a difficulty. This is something that people facing since
many, many years. At least I’m facing this since I don’t know how
many years. I can’t tell you, but the problem is known. And
sometimes, availability. You don’t have available person. What
you do? Region, what are the regions? There is no agreed
definition of the regions. ICANN have their regions, UN have their
regions, X has their regions and so on and so forth. Sometimes, a
few countries have a region, and one seven to 80 countries
another region.
How you could have a balance between the two? I’ll use an
example, Asia pacific. 75 countries or territories. Some other, 20
or less. How you could say there’s regional distribution, regional

Page 78 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

balance if it’s very difficult? So we have to find criteria, and we
have to know how to implement and how to apply that. But
availability, contributions, devotions, expertise, qualifications is
all of the important issues, and we have to find a compromise
between all of these. If we can’t find, good luck. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Well, I hope it isn’t just luck, Kavouss. I hope that the
conversation which you have outlined quite admirably there,
with the exception of the dinner arrangements, will certainly be
the basis for some of – I think – our discussions and healthy
debate in our work in this work stream activity.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thanks, Cheryl. I just want to remind those who are in the

queue that I have closed the queue after Avri, so that we can, of
course, take advantage of the time and better use the time that
we have allocated for this line of talks. I will close the queue with
Avri, and next on the queue, I have Malcolm Hutty.

MALCOLM HUTTY:

Thank you, Leon, and thank you Cheryl for your presentation.
I’m glad that this is focusing on outreach and inclusion and
development, and that people are alive to the dangers of
focusing on promoting certain demographic groups at the

Page 79 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

expense of the skills, knowledge and expertise and backgrounds
that is needed to drive ICANN’s work forward. I think that there is
a real danger in using coded language here that conceals what is
really being asked for.
When we talk about diversity, if we’re simply meaning increased
female participation rates, get more people from Africa and
something like that, we are narrowing the debate enormously.
And when we mean those things but refuse to say them out loud,
that makes it even worse, because it prevents us from having a
proper, open discussion about it. In particular, there are other
aspects of diversity that I – when I supported the creation of this
subgroup – really hoped that would be considered here.
Diversity as relating to the interests and concerns and
viewpoints of different types of people, whether that’s in terms
of things like technical skills and that sort of thing – okay, let me
give a couple of examples. These are just random examples, but
to give you an illustration. If there’s a discussion on intellectual
property enforcement matters within ICANN and it doesn’t have
a balance of people from intellectual property holding interests,
those that might be accused of breaching people’s intellectual
property rights and those that are intermediaries responsible for
dealing with those issues, if a group that is coming up with
issues on that doesn’t have a good balance between those, then

Page 80 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

it is likely to fail.It is not likely to have legitimacy, and the reason
for that is a lack of diversity in there.
If [inaudible] diversity consideration does not give proper space
to consider those sorts of issues, then we will really be missing
out, so I really hope that there’s focus on that. It’s not the only
example. When it comes to human rights, I want to make sure
that the intellectually property people are properly represented
in the human rights area. When it comes to ccNSO type things, if
it were all countries from one region of the world or all large
countries rather than small countries or whatever it might be,
that would compromise the quality of the work for lack of
diversity not based around demographic groups, so we need to
focus on that.
To be honest, I don’t care, when we’re having a discussion about
a matter that matters to me, what hangs between the legs of the
person who’s representing me or what their skin color is. What I
care about is whether they come from a background that
represents my interests, and that I think is much more
important. We need to be a little more committers to the idea of
the meritocratic idea, making sure that ICANN’s people are
selected according to what will drive ICANN’s work forward and
what will give proper and be seen as being legitimate
representation that all points of view are being considered.

Page 81 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

If we fail to ensure that certain parts of the world or whatever
have adequate access to this, then we will fail for that ground, so
we should do outreach work on that thing, but not only for parts
of the world or genders or whatever, but also for interest groups
as well, and these things need to be considered alongside each
other. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you, Malcolm, and you’ve identified something really
important. It’s so natural for people to only think gender and
geography. That’s the top of the pile stuff, it comes off first.
There is so much more to it from economic development status
to all sorts of other things, and it may indeed change and should
necessarily change to be fit for purpose for whatever activity
we’re doing. This is where we probably need to have some very
interesting and probably very tense discussions during this
working group activity in the near future.
But what I found exciting when I was sharing a little bit of time
with the outreaching of the three groups working together, the
Fellowship, the onboarding and the NextGen is more countries
represented by those people than I have ever seen before, from
spaces that we have not traditionally had a lot of inclusion. So
that in itself gives me a great deal of hope.

Page 82 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

There was a lot of Central European countries with people there
today. That’s nice, that’s important. There’ll be times when their
contribution is even more essential than at other times, but we
need those people in the puddle to begin with. Who’s next?

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thanks Cheryl, thanks Malcolm. Next on the queue, I

have Sonigitu Ekpe.

SONIGITU EKPE

Thank you. I think following on Markus’s discussion, I think it’s
really great that we have people that are really very intelligent in
areas you want to work on, but then there should be a deliberate
effort to enable new skills to be acquired, especially for those in
the informal economy. You’ll find out that the world is currently
moving at a very fast pace, but the citizens are not moving
likewise, especially in Africa. We are struggling to have national
unity, so we need to come out from the informal sector to the
formal sector before we get to the digital, and this can only be
done through learning. So we need more mentoring. If you
mentor us, of course, definitely learning by doing will bring
about the expertise. Thank you.

Page 83 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

Thank you, Sonigitu, and as you know, many of us in this room
are committed to making that happen in ICANN, so hopefully it’s
something that we will be able to say we have achieved at the
end of Work Stream 2, at least a plan for it, if not action.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

AVRI DORIA:

Thanks, Cheryl. Last on the queue is Avri.

Thank you. First of all, I want to thank people that have started
this discussion, because I’ve sort of been in a humdrum mode
this morning, and finally, people said something that made my
blood boil, and I quite appreciate it. And I want to argue for
diversity for diversity’s sake. I think those who speak against
diversity for diversity’s sake don’t know what they’re talking
about. Talking about lowering standards for diversity is
insulting. Talking about lowering skills for diversity is insulting. It
misses the point, that diversity brings in difference of
perception. It looks at the world differently, so when the white
person with the dangly parts is judging who is skilled and who is
not, they may be missing the perceptual basis for even
understanding the skills that are needed.
So I just want to – really, it does make my blood boil every time I
hear it. Even when I say it myself, it makes my blood boil. So we

Page 84 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

are ignoring that when we are ignoring that difference. We need
the cultural differences. We need the gender differences. We
need the sexual orientation differences.
We need all of those perceptual bases that define how human
behavior and how human societies organize themselves in order
to be skilled in the policies we are talking about. Without it, we
are just technicians doing a number, or just playing with
statistics.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you very much, Avri.

Avri, you know I love it when we have a good debate, but also I
assume it doesn’t make your blood boil when you hear that we
should be working together to have a commitment to ensure
that we do upskill, that we do promote, that we do mentor, that
we do support and we do enable diversity, because as I said at
the very beginning of my intervention, diversity does matter.
Diversity matters, so it shouldn’t be a discussion about lowering,
it should be a discussion about ensuring that we have the
diversity and enabled as many people who can contribute to
contribute effectively.

Page 85 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

AVRI DORIA:

EN

I guess, but I think the mixture we have now is not even
sufficiently diverse to recognize the skills that are needed.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Well, we can but try.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you both ladies for this debate. Thank you very

much Cheryl for this lightning talk. Next on the lightning talks is
[Dalila] [inaudible]. I see that some hands remain up in the AC
room, and I also note that there were some hands in the AC
room like Sebastien’s, we’ll be able to come back to you after
[Dalila’s] talk on diversity. So [Dalila,] the floor is yours.

[DALILA]:

Hi, thank you for giving me the floor. So this question, diversity is
very important for the ICANN, but also for all the users all over
the world. It’s not only an ICANN question, okay?
First of all, why diversity is important. At the end of the ‘90s, the
majority of the Internet users lived in the developed countries,
mostly in North America. Now, more than two thirds of Internet
users are from developing countries, and this number is
increasing in the coming years, and the majority of the Internet

Page 86 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

users will live in Asia, in Africa, in South America, and
consequently, these users are non-native English speakers.
However, the ICANN leadership does not reflect this diversity of
Internet, because 40% of the ICANN community leaders come
from North America, and more than 62% are native English
speakers.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Move a few centimeters from the microphone, it is

distorting.

[DALILA]:

Yes, okay. Now, it’s okay? Yes, it’s better. Sorry.
Women represent only 26% of the ICANN community leaders,
and 80% of the ICANN community leaders come from the
technical community and the private sector, while civil society
and government each account for only 10%.
So today, ICANN should embrace and reflect the diversity of
Internet users across the world. But what is the criteria? That is a
good question, Kavouss. I think we need a multidimensional
approach.
First criteria, the geographical origin that should be based on
regional analysis as well as on a per-country analysis.

Page 87 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Second criteria, the main languages. All languages shall be
represented in the ICANN leadership, and better balance
between the seven official languages of the ICANN too.
The gender equality, of course. As I said, the women are only
26% of the ICANN community leader, and I think that two other
criteria are important. First of all, the stakeholder criteria, to
have a better balance between the stakeholders group and the
ICANN, and the second criteria, which is the openness of the
ICANN to find a better balance between the insiders and the
outsiders in the ICANN [inaudible].
That’s why I think the first step is not to implement the diversity,
but to – for example – create an office of diversity and inclusion
in the ICANN, where this office will be in charge of two things.
First, gathering and analyzing the data regarding diversity within
the ICANN with these six criteria, and make a report to propose
concrete proposal to enhance diversity in the ICANN. Just very
quick, I think that diversity and skills are not opposed. You have
a lot of persons of diverse origin that are also competent within
the ICANN issue. Thank you very much.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, [Dalila]. Are there any questions or

comments in regard to [Dalila’s] lightning talk? Cheryl.

Page 88 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Thank you, [Dalila], and I really do appreciate how you identified
the diversity of the diversities we need to look at. And language
diversity is extremely important, but different parts of ICANN
have approached it and have greater or lesser success in how it
operates in a more multilingual way. We have now got the
Language Services Office within the ICANN structure, and there’s
a professional recognition of the importance of the services that
we use, both interpretation and translation.
As someone who only speaks Australian, so I don’t even speak
the English language, I’ve certainly been a strong supporter of
having as what the At-Large community has benefited on, from
so many years of real time telephonic meetings that are run in
up to four or five languages. So we run our monthly meetings
with Russian, with Chinese, with French, with Spanish
interpretation and an English channel. So there really isn’t a
technological excuse for not doing better, and I think we need to
recognize that we have an opportunity with ICANN, because it
has

already

made

some

significant

contributions

and

commitments to this general area to build a better model.
So it would be very exciting to see how we can work with that
conversation during our Work Stream 2, so let’s put a pin in that
and make sure that it’s taken as a piece or subwork of specific

Page 89 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

importance. We will probably always have one dominant,
agreed language for some level. It seems reasonable, for
example, that the Latin American and Caribbean should work in
languages that are primarily comfortable for them, and the
African community gets to work in languages that are
comfortable for them.
And of course, in Asia Pacific, because we’ve got in excess of 58
plus – without even looking at dialects – languages, we’ve
generally decided we’ll stick with English, because it’s just too
great a diversity to deal with at this stage. But that doesn’t mean
that outreach and activities in local language isn’t an absolute
essential, so let’s make sure that stays part of our agenda. Thank
you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Avri. I have three persons on the

queue, and then Elliot last on the queue, so I’m closing the
queue with Elliot, because we are running out of time. Next on
the queue is Alan Greenberg, and please try to keep it as
concrete as possible.

ALAN GREENBERG:

As usual, I will point out the last speaker was Cheryl, not Avri
though.

Page 90 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Oh, we’re always confused with she and I.

ALAN GREENBERG:

I’m going to follow on Cheryl. Language diversity is one of the
relatively few ones which comes with a large price tag. It’s not
the only one, but it’s one of the few ones that come with a large
price tag. ICANN has – on a regular basis over the last years –
said “It’s too expensive, we won’t do it.” I’m talking about both
written and verbal translation, interpretation. As we try to
expand and address that level of diversity, there is going to be a
price tag on it, and let’s not pretend there isn’t, and let’s face it
head-on.
There are other price tags. Using simultaneous interpretation on
teleconferences slows down the conference. It slows down the
effectiveness on it. That may or may not be a reasonable price to
pay, but let’s not pretend that it isn’t there. We have to be
honest with these things if we’re going to address them. Thank
you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Page 91 of 262

Thanks, Alan. Next on the queue is Jonathan.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

JONATHAN ZUCK:

EN

Thanks, Leon. I just got off a red eye, so I’ll try to tread carefully
and not make anyone’s blood boil before lunch. Some sort of
blood soup, I guess, but I guess a couple of things come to mind
on this topic. The first is about lowering standards for diversity. I
have to confess, I was really unaware that we had standards to
begin with, and as I look at some of the policies that have come
out of the organization, it feels as though the standard could
only go up.
But I take that as it was intended. I guess my concern though is
still related, and it’s not so much about lowering standards, it’s
about chasing our tails around diversity and trying to find a
balance, maybe about productivity and diversity, and finding
how to build a parallel track. I guess one of the things I want to
raise is the people that we serve is where we probably want to
explore the greatest need for diversity.
In other words, the people that are able to participate in the
programs that we’ve put in place, the applications for new
gTLDs, whether it’s IDNs, etc., people being able to register,
being able to protect themselves from online fraud and DNS
abuse, and just sort of participation in the DNS feels like the area
where we ought to be focusing our diversity efforts, more so
than making sure that every working group we have is diverse.

Page 92 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Now, there may be instances in which increasing diversity of a
working group helps with that problem, but we ought to be
overt about that and look at a diversity problem sort of out in
the world, outside of the verified air of ICANN meetings, and
seeing if bringing more voices into a particular discussion can
help address some diversity deficiencies that we see out in the
world that we attempt to serve. I want to make sure that we
keep the people we serve in mind, and not always be so sort of
focused on ourselves and be myopic organizationally. Thanks.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Jonathan. Next on the queue, I

have Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. [Dalila,] thank you very much. You started to talk about
some criteria. I want to mention something, that sometimes you
are able to know to identify a diversity [self] criteria, but political
environment prevents to implement that criteria. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Kavouss. Last on the queue is Elliot

Noss. Elliot?

Page 93 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

ELLIOT NOSS:

EN

Thank you. [Dalila,] I wanted to comment just on your reference
to a leadership of SOs and the lack of government involvement. I
think it’s important that we remember the particular history of
governments and ICANN where, for many years, governments
chose actively to stay outside of the ICANN process, and even
now with much more government involvement – which, by the
way, I think is a great thing and very positive about governments
being more active in the policy setting – it still is government
speaking as one voice typically through the GAC, and we’re only
at the very onset of people who are coming from government
actually taking active roles in the policy setting process.
I think we’re probably still years away from government
representatives actually coming into the process and just
participating almost as individual actors with that being their
background, which is really the way that people from the
business or technical or legal communities typically act, so I
think – I’d love to see a world where there is more of that, but I
think there’s got to be a continued evolution, and that we need
remember the history when measuring that. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Elliot. I realize that Fiona’s hand is

up, but I had closed the queue with Elliot, so I would like to
invite you, Fiona, to make your contribution after Mathieu’s

Page 94 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

presentation. So thank you very much, Dalila, for your
presentation, and now I would like to hand over the floor to my
co-Chair, Mathieu.

MATTHEW WEILL:

Sorry. Thank you.

[DALILA]:

So concerning the effort of translation, there are a lot of efforts,
but for example today, we have one option: to speak in English.
We cannot speak in French, it’s my mother tongue. We cannot
speak in Spanish, in Portuguese, and in the working group, the
main language is English, but the Internet users are not all native
English, so it is a very concrete example.
For the criteria, I think it is an open list. It was just six criteria to
design a framework on the definition of diversity, but we can –
and the Office of Diversity and Inclusion is a group to define
more precisely what is diversity. It was just some guidelines.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Dalila. Now, the turn for Mathieu’s lightning talk.

Thank you very much, León, and thank you Cheryl and [Dalila]
for their talks on diversity. I feel a little bit awkward as a co-chair

Page 95 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

to give a lightning talk, but that’s an issue that’s quite dear to
me from my perspective on what ICANN needs to be doing, and
once I’m done, I’m going to tell you my real point of view on
these things.
Yes, now we’re back. Good.
I think that addresses part of the discussion we’re starting to
have – I think that diversity is not an option. It is neither a
secondary requirement, it is a priority.
And the reason is in our report on Work Stream 1 – and if we can
get to the next slide – and it’s been captured at the insistence of
the public expert group experts, who were unanimous that there
was a problem with diversity in ICANN, and that this problem
was actually having effects on ICANN’s reputation, legitimacy,
credibility, and probably quality of policymaking, because
maximum participation, transparent deliberations of all the
stakeholders concerned, and as [Dalila] rightfully said, all the
stakeholders, most of them don’t speak English, most of them
are not represented in this room and I certainly don’t represent
them, but it’s needed to reflect the diversity of the point of
views, because we are a multi-stakeholder model, and the basis
of a multi-stakeholder model should be that all stakeholders are
represented in the discussion, and it is more important than
skills or expertise.

Page 96 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

So, where do we stand? Because we also need to recognize
where we stand now in this respect.
Next slide, please.
That was the exercise I’ve been doing with a few folks about
looking at a set of 190 what I call ICANN community leaders, so
not focusing on a specific group, because yes, focusing on a
specific group is too short of a dataset, but on the wider
leadership of ICANN. The people we select to represent us and
that actually make most of the decisions that influence the
policies, but also our culture.
And that includes the CCWG accountability members, by the
way. Eat your own dog food and look at yourself. So the next
slide, I go quickly on this. So North America, really strong. Africa,
Latin America and certain parts of Asia Pacific, very low. Asia
Pacific representation is mostly focused on Australia and New
Zealand, and that’s obviously an issue, just like European
representation is mostly focused on Western Europe, and that’s
an issue as well.
The next slide, please.
English speakers, tremendously dominant, and in some areas,
you could also see on the same graph that the North American
regions in the GNSO for instance is extremely present, to the

Page 97 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

point where if it was in other regions, I’m sure some of us would
start speaking about the risk of capture. So diversity is also an
issue for preventing capture, which is at the core of our
accountability group, isn’t it?
So native English speakers is – I mean, look at the people
speaking on our mailing lists, most of the most local ones are
usually native English speakers, or very fluent English speakers,
and that has an impact on the way discussions are shaped, take
form and decisions are made.
And there are ways to address that. I’m not going to get into
that. The next slide, please.
Gender balance. Well, SSAC, RSOC and even the NomCom – I’m
only speaking in terms of comparison with the rest of ICANN, but
[inaudible] there’s something wrong. Can I place a request to the
ombudsman for being censored? Okay, so there’s no reason not
to have more women. There are a lot of qualified women even in
the technical fields, in SSAC or root servers, and I’m not even
speaking about the NomCom. The next slide, please.
So a few thoughts. If you look at the regional balance, you will
see that everywhere when there is a Bylaw requirement, it
works. When there is not, it’s imbalanced. Food for thought.

Page 98 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

We also need to make sure to recognize that we tend to value
fluency in English over skills, I mean technical skills, and over fair
representation of stakeholders. We could question that. There
are other organizations who have been thinking about
improving diversity, and they’re close to us. IETF is one.
ITU is another, and every organization in the world has been
discussing diversity in one way or another, and every one of
them has started with the same discussion we’ve had today,
starting to say “Well, aren’t we going to lower our standards?”
That is the initial point of every discussion in diversity I’ve ever
heard about. In the political setup, that’s what I’ve been hearing
in the French parliamentary environment for what, 20 years
now? And it took quotas to change that. And if you look at the
rankings across the world, people who did quotas improved
faster than the ones who didn’t, and that’s being demonstrated.
So if we have to, then maybe we need to consider it, but there
are other steps. There are intermediate steps, and we should
look at them. First, looking at the data. That’s the first step for
every improvement. We need to look at our culture and how we
are welcoming others, because the way we structure discussions
with the open mic, it is not friendly for many cultures. It is very
focused on the Anglo-Saxon culture of confrontation, debate,
and this is not the way to welcome people from certain cultures,
like in Africa for instance.

Page 99 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

We need to look at what targets we could have. We need to look
at what incentive or penalties we would put on certain groups if
they don’t improve diversity. How about we restrict travel
funding for some groups if they don’t reach certain targets in
diversity? That can be an option.
We need to educate, and educate so that we stop thinking that
diversity lowers standards, and we stop thinking that it’s not
possible to find good candidates out there.
And finally, if needed, of course, there is the quota approach. I
think it is going to be difficult to get consensus on that soon, but
it’s good to remember that that’s an option and it works in a
number of cases. So the last slide, because I’ve been too long,
obviously. Every one of us can act now without any Work Stream
2 recommendation. It is dependent upon us to insist that
diversity is put on the agenda of every group. Every one of us can
request that diversity is made a decision making criteria in an
appointment process, or ask your representatives to be
accountable for that.
It is upon us to point out the diversity issues when they occur,
like this very [manner] or the appointment of three co-Chairs
from a single country in a very important policy working group.
That should never happen, it happened twice in the last six
months. It is our– we can all, if we care about diversity, go to the

Page 100 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

mic, point it out, put it on the record, and that’s the start of
diversity enhancement. And that’s going to be it for me, León,
thank you very much. I now go back to my neutral chairing
mindset. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Mathieu. There is a queue forming,

of course. I am closing it with Farzaneh. Well, okay, with
Sebastien. I’m closing the queue after Sebastien, so first on the
queue is Fiona Asonga. Fiona?

FIONA ASONGA:

Thank you very much, Mathieu for the presentation you’ve given
us, and good morning everyone. I think on the issue of diversity,
when we start looking at diversity and start thinking of
[inaudible] of skillsets, we are just [inaudible] perceptions that
have been carried along all the way as around diversity. There
have been certain perceptions that we now need to consider
and take new positions on, because things change.
Yes, it’s working.
So when we look at diversity and think of it in terms of skills, it
means we’re catching ourselves short even before we’ve begun
the process, because they believe that across the world, across

Page 101 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

all the different regions, we can get the skills that we’re looking
for to fill in the gaps that we need filled in.
The challenge is that we need to change our perceptions on
what views we have or opinions we hold on having geographical
diversity. We also need to look at our perceptions that we have
carried along over the years on cultural diversity and how that
impacts on how we’re able to deliver, because I think that it is
important for us to realize that the cultural differences that
there are do not mean that it’s a lack of knowledge or skills, it’s
just a different approach. And a different approach means that
we need to be ready to accommodate different views and
different opinions, but still find a way to negotiate and reach the
same point.
So the fact that I may be from Africa with a different cultural
view and understanding, and therefore [inaudible] an idea
differently does not mean that I’m ignorant or have less skills, it
is just about my ability to present, and English not being a first
language also has its challenges, so that means ICANN basically
needs to open up more and be more willing to negotiate, and
the truth of the matter is unless the question of diversity is
addressed by some Bylaw somewhere, the SOs and ACs are not
going to give it a priority, and that is why there isn’t enough
effort within a lot of the SOs and ACs to reach out, to get
participation and membership from other regions.

Page 102 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

With the exception of maybe the [SO] and ALAC that already
have structures that accommodate that, the rest really need to
take a concerted effort to reach the next billion of Internet users
and find ways of getting them to be involved and to participate
within ICANN. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Fiona. Mattheu, do you want to

comment on Fiona’s –

MATHIEU WEILL:

No.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

No, okay. So we’ll continue. Next on the queue, I have

Malcolm Hutty.

MALCOLM HUTTY:

This isn’t an intervention, actually, it’s a point of order. Mathieu,
thank you for your passionate advocacy for your point of view,
but the idea of you now going back to neutral chairmanship
seems open to question at the very least. Will you now recuse
yourself from more chairmanship duties related to this matter,
now that there is clearly no possibility of you being absent of the
suspicion of inability to be neutral?

Page 103 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

I think no, because we are on a multi-stakeholder approach, and
it is clear that rapporteurs and everyone come with their own
ideas. We respect everyone’s idea, I don’t think I have to recuse
myself from the discussions to be able to listen to your points,
try and see whether we have achieved consensus, and that’s
going to be my role as a co-Chair. I will not participate directly in
the Diversity Working Group however, but that’s my answer to
your very deliberate question. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Malcolm and Mathieu. Next in the

queue, I have Jorge Cancio.

JORGE CANCIO:

Hello and thank you very much for giving me the floor. As a start,
I would like to thank [Dalila] and Mathieu for their presentations,
especially the data put forward by Mathieu. As incomplete they
may be and as much we need to further refine this kind of data,
it’s a very good starting point and it gives us a factual basis for
our discussion.
I would like to be very clear: I think that diversity is not only a
question of fairness, it’s not only a question of representation of

Page 104 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

the global community, we intend to represent here. It’s also a
question of being smart, a question of a smart organization.
Diversity in the approaches to the different problems we are
confronted here which have this ever evolving nature is a
strength for this organization, so it’s not only fair, it’s smart to
have stronger diversity in this organization.
And we see with this data that there’s clearly a gap to be bridged
in this regard, so I think we have to go beyond openness.
Openness is a precondition, but it’s not enough. Openness, first
come first serve – only basing the work of the different working
groups in this organization based on the prior come, prior
served rule of openness is not enough.
We need to go beyond that, we need a welcoming culture, an
open culture for people who are not part of the core leadership
groups. We need also affirmative action to get these people
inside the leadership and to have a more diverse functioning
organization, which as I said before is not only fair, but is also a
smart approach. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Jorge. Next on the queue, I have

Olga Cavalli.

Page 105 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

OLGA CAVALLI:

EN

Thank you, good morning everyone, and thank you very much
Cheryl, [Dalila] and Mathieu for the presentation.
When I started my career as an engineer some years ago, I was
very young and I felt that any organization or company that had
no barriers to my participation would offer me equal
possibilities. I had that idea and I was very optimistic, and
experience told me that this doesn’t happen. Reality is different.
So I think that with time, I learned that in some spaces and for
some circumstances, having quotas is not a bad thing. And for
diversity and achieving some diversity in some spaces, for
example some groups in ICANN and some other organizations,
that could be a good way to achieve it.
There are enough different professionals of different gender and
color and origins and different regions that are extremely well
prepared to participate in all of these spaces, and for different
reasons, they don’t get there. So I think I will give a positive idea
of revising the concept of quotas in some of the Internet in
general organizations. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Olga. We had some technical

difficulties in the AC room, and I know that Kavouss was after
Olga, so Kavouss you’re next.

Page 106 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

Thank you, Leon. I think we’re talking of maximum participation.
Maximum participation in what? are we narrowing down
everything to the ICANN leadership, or we are talking in general?
Have there been any obstacles for participations in the ICANN
leadership? Have there been any obstacles in participation
elsewhere? Instead of talking about the maximum or minimum,
we should say what are the obstacles to implement these
diversity issues. And if we find this obstacle and try to find a
solution for that, it’s good, but I think everything is now
concentrated or narrowed down to the participation in ICANN
leadership, or use of particular language. We should see the
practicality to using other languages, how practical they are.
Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Kavouss. Next on the queue is

Farzaneh.

FARZANEH BADIEI:

Thank you. So I think the issue of diversity at ICANN is directly
related to the accountability of SO and ACs. How do they
actually take on members, and are there membership fees that
are hefty for developing countries? And also, some of them do

Page 107 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

not accept individual members. Now, I’m not saying that they
should change their governance, but this actually is a big hurdle
for people to join.
Also, there’s a problem – and this is a problem that I have
personally faced – that sometimes if you are from a country but
you have moved somewhere else, they want you to be a resident
of the country to be able to apply in that region. Well, I was born
and raised in that region, I understand the difficulties, I’m still in
touch with people in that region. Does that really mean I don’t
understand them anymore? So I think we need to also look at
ourselves and the rules, and see what we can come up with.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Farzaneh. Next on the queue, I

have Sebastien Bachollet.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Thank you very much, Leon. A few things. First, we need to be
able to go ahead with the diversity question. Of course, define
what it is, and we have a good document in the Work Stream 1
deliberation with some list of possible items to take care as
diversity issue. But I think we need also to say that even if we put
all that in diversity, it’s not the right word for everything. For
some issue, it may be more balance than diversity issue, but if

Page 108 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

we put all that together, we need to discuss the list, but also we
need to see where are problems, and I want to point some of
them.
For example, when you talk about the NomCom issue, NomCom
is supposed to select people, and one of the reasons of the
NomCom to take a decision after – in June, and after the
election of each group, it has to help to better balance, to better
diversify the people selected in different bodies.
But at the same time, the way we as a community are asking the
NomCom to work, what are the skillsets we ask for, we need to
revise that. I think when the Board asks for people with business
knowledge, maybe we need to change that to something else,
the Board is not just a business-oriented group.
And if you take back some history – and there are people in this
room who can help me with that, but when we created the
ccNSO, the discussion was “Can we open the ccNSO to all the
stakeholders?” The answer was “No, we will keep with just as a
manager of ccTLD.” So be it, but the final decision was to have
the ccNSO council open to three nominated by the Nominated
Committee, and it was supposed to allow those users to get – for
example – to other stakeholders, and it was, in our mind, users
of multiple ccTLDs who could add a voice there. it was never
applied.

Page 109 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

We have to think if those ideas at the beginning are still useful
and could be brought back. And I want to end up with two
examples in At-Large. We just end up to select another member
to the ALAC from the European region, from EURALO, and as I
am one of the two selected by EURALO, the second, we try and
we success to have somebody from Eastern Europe with very
good skill – I am sure better than mine – and she’s a woman. So
sometimes, we can find and have good solution
Now, the last point, it’s from my point of view a wrong decision.
We at ALAC have the possibility to select five people to the
NomCom, and we select four men and one woman. I struggled
to have some more balance, and I was not successful in that.
That’s a pity. Thank you very much.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Sebastien. We have one last

contribution, Lousewies’ AC room froze, so she couldn’t raise her
hand in time before I closed the queue, but it’s interesting, of
course, to get to know a board member’s perspective on
diversity. So Lousewies, please take the floor.

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: Thanks. I wasn’t going to share my personal perspectives,
because everyone who follows me on Twitter knows where I

Page 110 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

stand. But I just wanted to – sitting here as a Board member – to
let you know that the Board has appointed liaisons, and I will be
doing diversity and we have a backup for everything, so [Lito]
who’s at the back of the room will be the backup for diversity.
We’re dealing with a lot of these issues inside the organization as
well, and one of them is that we had a session – as those of you
who have been following it know – also on volunteers and trying
to fight volunteer fatigue, and diversity is an important element
of that, also because we don’t want to have a bias whereby it’s
always the same people. We want new people coming in, that’s
also part of diversity, and we have to have an inclusive
atmosphere for that.
So we’re working on a lot of this stuff as well and we really look
forward to working together. Thanks.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Lousewies. Okay, so trying to take

stock on what we’ve heard, I think that the main point is that on
diversity, we have diverse points of views. There are different
approaches, we have different issues, so I guess for those who
will be participating on the Diversity subgroup, you should
definitely look at the common grounds that can lead us into a
constructive perspective.

Page 111 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Maybe some of the questions that this subgroup should answer
is what we mean by diversity, what is desirable, possible,
implementable, does the pool of selectees actually limit the
success of the selection, or those in charge of selecting new
leadership roles? Do we want diversity for diversity’s sake, does
diversity for diversity’s sake go along with lowering standards,
whatever that means, and why is diversity important for ICANN?
Does ICANN leadership reflect the Internet’s nature of diversity?
And we should also study ICANN’s current diversity level and
propose enhancements accordingly.
And language, language is a major issue that I can see coming in
the diversity discussion. We should assess whether we need
quotas. We should also discuss whether building diversity into
our Bylaws would help fostering diversity within ICANN. I also
heard that diversity is not only necessarily but also smart, and
that openness is not enough, but just a precondition for
enabling diversity.
So with this, I’d like to thank everyone that provided us with
lightning talks, and it is time for us to have a lunch break. After
that, we will be coming back for some lightning talks by Siva and
Phil Corwin and other volunteers that have signed up and who
weren’t present at the room when we were addressing the
particular topics that they signed up for. So thank you very

Page 112 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

much, we will pause for a moment. We will go for a lunch break
and we’ll come back. We’ll reconvene in –

MATTHEW WEILL:

In an hour’s time, so ten past one. And you can leave the stuff
here.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

MATTHEW WEILL:

And where is the lunch served?

And the lunch is in the back of the room. First come, first served.

PART 2

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Okay, so the co-Chairs are in and we have audio. So could

you please take your seats? Alright, welcome back. We hope you
had a great time having lunch.
We will be doing some amendments to the schedule. Originally
we were planning to have the update on Work Stream 2
background papers at this time but instead we’re going to
continue with the lightning talks. And afterwards we will be
reviewing the Work Stream 2 background papers and after that

Page 113 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

we’ll have the coffee break and we’ll continue with the original
schedule for Work Stream 2 and ATRT 3 Timing and Any Other
Business.
So at this time I would like to welcome Siva so he can provide us
with his lightning talk on guidelines for standards of conduct.
Siva, you have five minutes.

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

Thank you, co-Chairs. The topic of guidelines for Board conduct
could be expanded as a broader topic of Board accountability
and discussed in the same manner as AC/SO accountability of
staff accountability is to be discussed. AC/SO and staff
accountability measures work at one level whereas the
organization’s accountability is epitomized by the Board
accountability

design.

Such

a

discussion

on

Board

accountability needs to be distinct from generalized discussions
on ICANN accountability.
Next slide please.
The ICANN Board is to be held accountable for what it does do
and what it does not do that affects ICANN. The Board is also to
be held accountable for everything that ICANN as an
organization does do and does not do that affects the DNS and
the larger Internet. Even if such actions of ICANN or such actions

Page 114 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

of any of its parts happen without the explicit consent or
discernible directives from ICANN Board. In other words, the
Board ought to be held accountable for even that which arises
outside the Board.
Next slide please.
If the Board is [notionally] to be held accountable it requires to
be sufficiently empowered first. We need to review how the
Board is positioned in the organization. In the past we have had
situations where there were situations of Board [inaudible]
depending on administrative decisions and there were
situations of difficulties and Board staff interactions. We need to
look into issues that may potentially limit the Board’s ability to
function, including the constitution of voting and non-voting
members.
Work Stream 1 has created new challenges and new processes
for safeguards which proceed on the assumptions that new
community powers would provide the necessary challenges
against abuse of Board pass. These measures tend to disperse
responsibilities, especially in the context of accountability and
increase room for lack of clarity on who is to be held
accountable for the decisions needed for the pursuit of the
overall mission of ICANN on developments that may occur to the
distortion of the overall purpose of the organization.

Page 115 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Next slide please. Next one.
It wouldn’t help the pursuit of ICANN’s mission to approach the
topic of Board accountability as an exercise of creating more
processes that may actually slow down or even limit the Board’s
capacity to issue necessary directives. On the other hand, it
becomes difficult approach the question of who would oversee
the Board which would inevitably give rise to the question of
who would oversee the overseer.
The answer so far is the community, but we could come up with
a new solution that may neither entirely depend on oversight
nor on challenges and limitations.
The last slide. Next slide please. Okay.
ICANN Board as an entity comprises individuals.. The propensity
of the Board to be effective, correct, and just, depends on who
the Board attracts to be its constituents. If the Board, as it does
to a noticeable extent now, attracts individuals from any part of
the world who are at such stage that they’re not expected to
deviate from the larger purpose, we will have an accountability
framework around the [inaudible] Board even more worthy of
trust on its conduct of business in a manner that would require
little or no challenges or a [closer] oversight. Such an
accountability framework would ensure good governance even

Page 116 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

ahead of implementation of diversity, irrespective of jurisdiction
or even staff diversity.
I would say that the issues like jurisdiction and diversity are very
important, but these processes would tend to take a long time
and in the meantime, the Board needs to be far more
accountable, their design has to be much higher and also that
even if the jurisdiction question remains and even if there is no
diversity or a lack of diversity, the Board accountability design
has to be such that there is overall fairness without even
diversity or irrespective of jurisdiction.
These are actually rough ideas, very rough ideas. These ideas are
to be brought to good shape by Work Stream 2. Thank you very
much.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Siva, for this lightning talk. We

have a queue and the first in the queue is Kavouss.

KAVOOS ARASTEH:

Yes, thank you very much. I think we have sufficiently discussed
Board accountability. What else we have to discuss? What
framework we have to discuss?

Page 117 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

EN

Okay, Kavouss. We have discussed Board accountability and
when we discussed Board accountability we have talked about
new processes and community mechanisms. We’ve talked about
removal of Board of Directors and processes to remove Board of
Directors or processes and processes to create new processes
and so on. So I’m talking about an inherent design, an inherent
framework that would make the Board to be a Board of much
higher standards. I mean, we have a Board of standards. It is
that which inspires me to talk about much higher standards. We
have a Board of standards – I’m talking about elevated
standards. As I said, these are rough ideas to be explored, to be
thought of, to be debated.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Siva. Next on the queue we have

Thomas Rickert.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Leon. Thanks, Siva, for the lightning talk. I
think when I read Holly’s e-mail with respect to this very topic, I
think the intention in our report making reference to standards
to be developed is not one that addresses the Board and its
conduct, but it addresses the community members that want to
remove a Director.

Page 118 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

This whole debate was sparked off – and I think it was Alan
Greenberg who made that point – that we need to worry about
liability of community members that bring forward the request
to remove a Board member or the entire Board to prevent those
community members or protect them against being taken to
court and sued. And the responses that the community should
have standards written down and that if the community plays by
these standards, that then there would be no risk of being held
liable. And that would include – and I read from Holly’s e-mail –
“Indemnification associated with the removal of individual
ICANN Board Directors that guidelines for standard of conduct
that will be presumed to be in good faith. For example,
conducting reasonable due diligence as to the truthfulness of a
statement that is brought forward as a reason for Board
removal.”
So I think maybe we need to focus on that angle, if our group
chooses to. And that is not to [diminish] the importance of the
points that you’ve raised, but I guess that our main requirement
or our main challenge for this phase is to look at how the
community needs to act in order to reduce liability risk for
community members when it comes to spilling Board members.
Thank you.

Page 119 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

EN

Let me respond to that, Thomas. I understood the topic as
proposed now, that of making sure that Board removal exercise
does not go wrong, but I distinctly noticed the absence of Board
accountability in Work Stream 2. Coming back to Kavouss again,
we did discuss Board accountability in work Stream 1 but Work
Stream 2 is supposed to look at the topics without pressure of
the time limit and so on in an expanded scope. That’s why I said
this topic needs to be expanded and examined in this light.
Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Siva. Are there any other

comments or questions? I see Greg Shatan’s hand is up. Greg?

GREG SHATAN:

I feel like all of Work Stream 1 was in one way or another
devoted to Board accountability. So I think we’ve pretty much
covered that. I don’t really see where this goes, and certainly it
isn’t one of our enumerated topics. And I do think that there was
interest in the issue of standards of Board conduct which was
this was accidentally thought to be and I think there may be
something worthwhile in exploring that. And I believe there
already are guidelines and the like, so that would not be starting
from scratch but the idea of looking at Board accountability

Page 120 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

again seems to me to be an avenue that’s not really one we
should or need to go down. Thanks.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Greg. Siva, do you want to

comment on that?

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

Yes, Greg. By proposing a discussion on this I don’t mean any
disrespect for the work done by the community and the
processes that have been developed. The work that has been
done has been quite impressive. But I’m merely proposing that
we should look at it in a much, much, broader light. And I can
assure you that the time is not going to be wasted on this. It’s
going to be very, very, useful for the organization. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Siva. So now I would like to… Oh,

we have two more people and now the queue is closed after
James Gannon. So we have Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. Thank you again. I think we need to give some time for a
process to get into the implementation stage and to see whether
it work or doesn’t work. It’s not necessary to have regulations

Page 121 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

after regulation, process after the process. Let us wait, monitor
to see what will happen. If there is a need, the door is not at the
end. Everything is open. We can come back and at some stage
according to the existing procedure we can correct if there is
some difficulties. So perhaps let us concentrate on something
which have not yet addressed. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

No, nothing to add.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

JAMES GANNON:

Thanks, Kavouss. Siva, do you want to comment on that?

Okay. Last is James Gannon.

Thanks, Leon. I’ll keep it very brief. I think if we haven’t put in the
framework and the controls around Board governance at this
point, we’ve kind of failed [us] the entirety of Works Stream 1. It
was a huge part of what we did. And we don’t have unlimited
time and resources. I don’t feel that this is reflective of what we
were supposed to be doing with Work Stream 2. We did a lot of
work around possibly one of now the most accountable Boards
out there, so I don’t see where this fits into our Work Stream 2.

Page 122 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

EN

Thank you very much, James. I think that the way

forward should be to actually focus on community member
guidelines for conduct and the Board removal and recall
process, and that should help us have a more clear view on this
issue of Work Stream 2.
Thank you very much, Siva, for providing us with that lightning
talk. And now I would like to handle the mic to my co-Chair
Thomas for the next lightning talk.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks so much, Leon. I will only step in for a little bit to invite
Phil Corwin to the table. You will remember we had our
discussion on jurisdiction earlier this morning and there is one
lightning talk missing and Phil is making his way to the talk table
for the remote participants. He’s very fast, almost running, to
the table. And he said that he will need a maximum of five
minutes for this, so we’re looking forward to your lightning talk.
And for those who are not in the Adobe, he is putting his glasses
on. Now he is looking like he’s ready. Over to you.

Page 123 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

PHIL CORWIN:

EN

Thank you, Thomas, and the other co-Chairs. I’m Phil Corwin.
I’m a member of the Business Constituency and one of their
GNSO Counselors. I’m speaking entirely in a personal capacity
today on the subject of jurisdiction. Some may find my remarks
somewhat confrontational, but I’m hoping they will set off a
good debate.
When we look at Work Stream 1 – and by the way, I’m sorry I
wasn’t here this morning for the other remarks. My
understanding was that the lightning round should be this
afternoon – I want to address the central question of ICANN’s
corporate jurisdiction, recognizing that there are other
secondary jurisdictional issues to be addressed in Work Stream
2. And my contention is that the only logical and functional
decision to make for ICANN’s corporate jurisdiction – which is
currently a California non-profit corporation – is to enshrine that
status in a fundamental Bylaw.
When we look at Work Stream 1, the two important things that
the Accountability Group did – and the CWG as well – was create
two new entities for the transition and accountability – the PTI
and the Empowered Community – both of which were required
by fundamental Bylaws to be California non-profit corporations.
ICANN, of course, has been a California non-profit corporation
since its founding in 1998. The new Bylaws also require that any

Page 124 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

change in the fundamental Bylaws – that is, any change in the
status of the PTI and the EC – would have to be communicated
to the California Secretary of state. The accountability plan was
designed to be maximally effective within the context of
California non-profit corporation law. Any disputes involving
ICANN, the PTI or the EC, will be decided within the U.S. legal
system. I’m not arguing that it’s the best or only good legal
system in the world, but it is well regarded for making objective
determinations under a reliable rule of law.
For those worried about government interference, by being a
U.S. corporation ICANN enjoys the protection of the First
Amendment which forbids the United States government from
enacting any law that would coerce ICANN into using its root
zone control to abridge free speech.
Now, those were the things we did do. The things we didn’t do
in Works Stream 1 was make a final decision on the ICANN
parent corporation jurisdiction in the context of a fundamental
Bylaw. The current Bylaw provision that requires ICANN to
maintain its principle office in Los Angeles County has not been
made a fundamental Bylaw. The Affirmation of Commitments
were largely incorporated into the Bylaws by including the three
periodic reviews required by the 2009 Affirmation of
Commitments to become fundamental Bylaws, but we did not
incorporate the other Affirmation of Commitment requirement

Page 125 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

that ICANN remain a non-profit corporation headquartered in
the United States.
Now, these were conscious decisions of the CCWG on
Accountability. I respect them. I would maintain simply that
putting aside the other secondary jurisdiction issues, that the
central question of ICANN’s corporate jurisdiction should be
decided with finality as early in the Work Stream 2 process as
possible. We don’t want to be sitting here in a decade debating
ICANN exit from the U.S. We don’t want this issue to become a
festering sore on the body politic of ICANN itself. We really need
to resolve this soon, because there is no… Some people talk
about some safe harbor in international law. There is no
international law for corporate governments. There’s no
international law for competition and anti-trust issues.
ICANN must be – if it’s going to be a non-profit corporation
which is the whole point of this transition exercise – must be
domiciled in some jurisdiction. If this was a matter of first
impression, we could debate which national jurisdiction was the
best. But it’s not a matter of first impression. ICANN was created
by the U.S. government. It’s been situated in the United States
for 20 years. And we’ve made decisions in Work Stream 2 which
tie ICANN through the PTI and the EC even closer to California
law and therefore U.S. jurisdiction.

Page 126 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

And finally, I don’t think we want to be – having spent, I believe,
in excess of $23 million in legal fees so far as well as two years –
we don’t want this central jurisdiction issue to become
something that just continues and continues and wastes time
and wastes legal resources. If there ever becomes a reason in the
future to look at it again, we’re perfectly capable of doing that. If
by some unforeseen means the U.S. government starts to
interfere in an unacceptable way with ICANN. But short of that,
we should decide this question as early as possible, and I believe
and contend that the only logical way to resolve it in
consistently with the decisions we’ve made in Work Sream 2 is to
make ICANN’s parent corporation permanent jurisdiction a
fundamental Bylaw of ICANN. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Phil. We have roughly 15 minutes for this
discussion because we have rearranged our schedule slightly.
Before we move to the queue, let me just out of personal interest
ask you as an attendee of the CCWG for many, many, months –
You took your arguments, I guess, from the article that you
wrote. You’ve written about this and when I read your article as
well as when I heard your intervention now I was wondering
where you took from that we discussed that ICANN should be
elsewhere.

Page 127 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

I mean, that was the starting point. We have it in the Articles of
Association. Those have fundamental Bylaw statutes. So the
status quo that we have put in place with our report and its
implementation into articles and Bylaws is that it is a U.S.
corporation and that it would be governed by that law.

PHIL CORWIN:

I wasn’t’ involved intimately in every aspect of the CCWG over its
two year course in this issue. I have discussed with other
individuals who were very involved that attempts were made to
make this a fundamental Bylaw. I recognize it’s in there now, but
it doesn’t enjoy the full protection that fundamental Bylaw
status would give it and there are various individuals and [NTDs]
out there which clearly are on the record and I documented in
my short 10,000 word article who want to reopen the debate and
make ICANN an international organization, and in effect an IGO.
And I think my concern is based upon those public statements
and I think it would be best to engage on this and make a final
decision by adopting fundamental Bylaw status for being
headquartered in the U.S.

THOMAS RICKERT:

I’m sure that Steve will speak to that topic when we move to the
queue. I was just curious whether you found anything in our
report that suggests that we have moved away from the…

Page 128 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

PHIL CORWIN:

EN

Only in my discussions with other individuals who tries to push
for fundamental Bylaw status in the Works Stream 1 process and
there was resistance.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Just to finish that point, I think when we discussed this very
early days in Works Stream 1, there were ideas that ICANN could
be looking at other jurisdictions such as Switzerland and other
others. And we sort of ended that discussion said we certainly
need a jurisdiction that can deliver on the accountability
requirements that we have but that, as long as a gap analysis
doesn’t show that we have deficiencies using California law to
deliver, that we wouldn’t pursue that. And so far – unless I have
entirely gotten this whole thing wrong – all the accountability
features or the accountability requirements that we came up
with, could be operationalized under California law.
But maybe we take this offline and move to the queue now.
Steve is next.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Phil, I share your concern of the unpleasant eventuality that
might result if ICANN were to be uprooted from its principle

Page 129 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

jurisdiction, but I don’t share your analysis of whether or not
CCWG addressed that concern.
As Thomas just indicated, the regular Bylaw is that the principle
office for the business of ICANN shall be in Los Angeles. And
since that’s a regular Bylaw and it doesn’t enjoy the protection
that you and I seek. So what the CCWG did when we analyzed
bringing 8C over from the Affirmation of Commitments is we
looked at the Articles of Incorporation, and the Articles of
Incorporation say that ICANN is organized under California nonprofit public benefit corporation law. And the next sentence says
that the corporation will be exclusively operated for charitable
educational, scientific purposes within the meaning of 501C3 of
the U.S. Internal Revenue code.
So the Articles of Incorporation – just the one-page document
that we’re now taking public comment on – make it clear that
ICANN is a California corporation and it’s organized under that
law and serves the purpose of the U.S. Internal Revenue code
law.
So why would they give you any satisfaction? Because the
articles of Incorporation under our proposal require the written
approval of the Empowered Community to be changed. That is
to say one syllable of the articles to be changed. We, the
Empowered Community, have to prove it in writing. That is a

Page 130 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

stronger level of protection than it would enjoy as a
fundamental Bylaw where we simply have a consensus – we
don’t even require a unanimity for that purpose.
So I really believe it’s been solved, and I’m pretty sure you are
aware of that, so what did you believe was insufficient about our
belts and suspenders of using the articles?

PHIL CORWIN:

I agree with everything you said except for one point. If, now that
the PTI which will operate the IANA functions, is going to be a
California corporation the Empowered Community is going to be
a separate California corporation and the Articles of
Incorporation remain for ICANN a U.S. corporation based in
California, why wouldn’t we take the logical step of adding a pair
of suspenders in making that a fundamental Bylaw – ICANN’s
own U.S. status?
I think as long as that’s not a fundamental Bylaw, it’s more
subject to continual debate.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

I can’t see that, because the same [de laude], the Empowered
Community, would have to approve a change to the Articles and
there isn’t any point in saying that, “Oh, yes. They also have to

Page 131 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

improve a change to a fundamental Bylaw that accomplishes
precisely the same thing. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks. Let’s move to Christopher Wilkins now.

CHRISTOPHER WILKINS:

Thank you. Phil, it’s a pity you weren’t here this morning for a
much more detailed discussion than we have time for now.
Suffice to say that I’m – as I’ve already indicated on the list – I do
not agree with you. I’m afraid to say that what you’re suggesting
outside this room risks being interpreted as almost a
provocation. We have had Californian jurisdiction for nearly 20
years and I don’t expect that to change very much, but to make
the proposal that – you used the words definitive and
permanent – to make a proposal along those lines to that extent
at this stage in the proceedings of Work Stream 2 which has only
just begun, I feel, would lead to unfortunate consequences.
There are a lot of countries who don’t agree with you. We need
to keep them on board. And I think going in your direction would
be counterproductive in that sense. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Page 132 of 262

Thanks Christopher. Kavouss?

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

Yes, thank you very much, Phil, for your explanations and your
presentation. I don’t think that the headquarter of ICANN being
in California or U.S.A. to be in fundamental Bylaw or the regular
Bylaw resolve the issue of jurisdiction. If you go to another
country, still jurisdiction exist the discussion. So we have to take
it from that aspects. I don’t think that after so many debate that
this it was decided that at least at this time or for the time being
it remained in regular Bylaw we should bring back the issue of
the headquarters associated that with the jurisdictions and say
that, “Okay, first put it in the fundamental Bylaw and then I
don’t know how the jurisdiction will be.” If you go to the [third]
country, still we have the same problem. I think we have agreed
on that for the time being, we have [let] the process to be
implemented. And if there is any need in future, the door is not
closed. We should come back [to that].
This is not, I would say, a justifications of jurisdiction discussions
to the fundamental Bylaw for the ICANN home or for the regular
Bylaw. We have to address the jurisdiction and still we have a lot
of things to discuss [in the] jurisdictions. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Page 133 of 262

Thanks, Kavouss. Next in line is Paul.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

PAUL MCGRADY:

EN

So I guess I’m just confused about how this is all being
discussed, because on one hand we have everybody telling Phil,
“Gee whiz. There’s nothing to worry about when it comes to
jurisdiction. That’s never going to change and Work Stream 1
took care of that.” But on the other hand we have people calling
for jurisdiction shopping and if there’s nothing to worry about
and Work Stream 1 took care of it and jurisdiction shopping is
not possible under the accountability mechanisms, then why is
there a Work Stream 2 on this topic? Why not just say jurisdiction
was handled by Work Stream 1, there’s nothing to worry about,
people who want to change the jurisdiction would then go out
an agitate for that in their own way in some other mechanism.
What’s it doing under this umbrella if, in fact, Phil has nothing to
worry about? Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Just to maybe refresh our memories on one of the findings this
morning or even in the Work Stream 1 report, jurisdiction is a
multifaceted topic, and Phil is talking to the issue of place of
incorporation even though [Paul] might not be interested in my
answer now. So I might as well move on. Let’s go to Jan now.

Page 134 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

JAN AART SCHOLTE:

EN

Yes, thanks. Just on the principle that Work Stream 2 is not a
place to reopen issues that were settled in Work Stream 1, and it
was said this morning that jurisdiction shouldn’t be an occasion
to open up the issues that were settled in work Stream 1. And my
sense that this particular issue about the ordinary versus
fundamental Bylaw was settled at Dublin. There was a very,
very, full and long debate and everyone had their say and the
conclusion was that it should be an ordinary Bylaw. Presumably
that was that and we go on to other things now.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Jan. Greg?

GREG SHATAN:

Jan, I compare what you say to what Steve DelBianco said, and
it seems like the reason that in the end it was not a fundamental
Bylaw is because the Articles of Incorporation enjoy the same
amount of protection as fundamental Bylaws do and it would be
redundant for the jurisdiction section of the Bylaws to be a
fundamental Bylaw. Or another way to look at it is that we
somehow try to split the baby and have some people think that
we had a non-fundamental Bylaw and other people think we
had a fundamental Article, and the answer is that we have both.
The end effect, though, is that you can’t make a change in
jurisdiction without changing both the Articles and the Bylaws.

Page 135 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

So I think the head of the baby lived and the bottom half. Well,
anyway, that’s not a good analogy to continue with especially
right after lunch.
But more to the point, I think that there are a lot of secondary
issues under jurisdiction I think we all need to talk about. And
then there is this, what Paul calls jurisdiction shopping, and
there seems to be a question about whether we should be
talking about that or not and whether we’re going to just do
another baby splitting exercise over that and but ultimately end
up with the result that we have. So if it makes people feel good
to think that we’re going to be talking about moving ICANN to an
island outside of any country’s jurisdiction, I think you can build
one of those fairly quickly.
That’s one thing, but it does seem like we’re going to take a lot
of time to discuss that because for a number of people that is
the jurisdiction line. So there’s going to be a significant
management issue to confront on that and I think that is a lot of
what underlies Phil’s point.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Page 136 of 262

Thanks very much, Greg. Brett?

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

BRETT SCHAEFER:

EN

Thank you. I think we would all be relieved if the Articles of
Incorporation actually said what Steve said they said. But they
don’t. The Articles of Incorporation say that it’s organized under
California non-profit public benefit corporation. It is organized
under California non-profit public benefit corporation law for
charitable and public purposes. It says nothing about being
incorporated there. It says nothing about the headquarters
being in California. It says nothing about the principle offices
being there. The principle offices are in the Bylaws but they’re a
regular Bylaw not a fundamental Bylaw. And there is nothing
preventing ICANN from being organized under California law,
but being incorporated someplace else.
So if this is a situation where there is no circumstance under
which ICANN could be relocated to a different jurisdiction for the
purposes of [being] its headquarters, I think we need to shore
this up and make clarifications in the Articles of Incorporation
and we made this recommendation somewhere else. And if
everybody’s in agreement here that this is a possibility beyond
the realm of consideration, then I don’t understand the
hesitation for making that clarification in the Articles. There is
nothing stopping – if Work Stream 2 so determines – that we’re
going to move jurisdiction, that can be done through the normal
process of amendment to the Bylaw and amendment to the
Articles of Incorporation as laid out.

Page 137 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

But I think that we should be doing this very properly and very
prudently because we have undertaken a serious amount of
investment in terms of ICANN’s money in order to make sure
that the Bylaws and everything else is consistent with California
corporate law. And that if we move someplace else and
potentially we may have to adjust the Bylaws to meet the
circumstances of a different jurisdiction, then that’s an
additional expense. But regardless of whether that expense is
worthwhile or not, we should be doing so with the full support of
the Empowered Community as we’ve laid out here.
And so I don’t see anything wrong with putting it in the Articles
of Incorporation the fact that ICANN is incorporated in California
and that its headquarter and principle offices are there. I f we
want to make that change later on I don’t see any reason why
we can’t do that, but at least right now we would, I think, benefit
from the certainty of the current situation. Thanks.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Brett. I guess according to other lawyers in
the room there is no such uncertainty even with the language
that we have in the Articles of Association now. So Greg says,
“Organized means incorporated. There is no space between the
two.” And Becky adds, “I just don’t think that’s correct, Brett,

Page 138 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

being organized under is the equivalent of being incorporated
in.”
So I won’t comment on that any further. I had closed the queue. I
would like to give Phil the opportunity to make some closing
remarks, so give feedback to what you’ve heard earlier.

PHIL CORWIN:

Well, as lawyers are wont to say, there’s three sides to every
issue – my side, your side, and the truth. And the community will
decide the truth. I make this proposition not to be
adversarial/confrontational, but simply out of recognition – and
again, it’s documented in my article and we’ve heard some
reference here – there are nations, there are organizations, there
are individuals, who view what we’ve come up with not as the
end game of ICANN’s jurisdiction but as a weigh station to
possible future changes. And that’s the reason I’ve proposed
what I have, and I’m glad to see it’s initiated a good debate. It’s
not the only jurisdiction issue. I think it’s a central issue, but
there are many other secondary issues to be looked at and I look
forward to working constructively and in good faith with other
members of the community as we work on the jurisdictional
issues. Thank you.

Page 139 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

THOMAS RICKERT:

EN

Thanks very much, Phil, for the lightning talk. And thanks to all
of you for a very interesting discussion. And in summary, I think
adding to what we’ve summarized this morning I think it
becomes clearer and clearer that when talking about jurisdiction
most of us are thinking much more of the secondary topics
rather than the place of incorporation which currently is
Californian law in California. And with that, I’d like to hand over
to Mathieu for chairing the next session.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you very much, Thomas. Our next session is a little
breathing room between lightning talks, and it’s a follow-up on
the discussion we had last week – or was that Tuesday?
Probably we’re in the same week – during our last call about
background papers. Staff have been extremely busy at
assembling papers that would be used as inputs for every
subgroup, and we thought it would be a good idea to give you a
flavor of one of these so that we can interact, adjust, and feed
the different subgroups with the relevant documentation so
they can start working faster. Basically, it’s a bootstrap for each
of the subgroups.
So who is speaking? Is that you, Grace? Yes, please. So Grace is
going to introduce us to these background papers. Grace.

Page 140 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

GRACE ABUHAMAD:

EN

Thanks. Terri, can you move to the next slide please?
This is Grace Abuhamad, one of the staff supporting the CCWG
Accountability. Next slide please.
We’ve developed staff papers for you to sort of get you started
on the Work Stream 2 topics. They are simply sort of starting
point type papers. They’re divided into three sections. The first
section is Scope – sort of just an extract from the Work Stream 1
report, Bylaw if applicable.
The second section is a sort of a background on discussion that
either the community has had in our Work Stream 1
conversations or elsewhere in and some questions that may be
helpful for the subgroup to consider.
And then the third section is just a list of resources. Do we have
time for me to pull an example up?

MATHIEU WEILL:

Yes, for you we have time.

GRACE ABUHAMAD:

Sure, thank you. Okay. Terri, can we put up the Ombudsman
paper please?
So I’ll show you an example of what we’ve come up with. So far
we’ve circulated three papers to the list. They’re in Google Doc

Page 141 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

format so you can go ahead and comment. Thank you, Jorge, for
already putting some in on the Human Rights topic. We’re
hoping that these papers really will just sort of kick start the
work of the groups and that each subgroup could either take
them and rewrite them, develop them, or not use them at all. It’s
really up to you. But we’re just trying to provide some material
to help.
So, Terri, if you can go ahead and scroll slowly, we’ll just show
the group a little bit what these look like.
This is the Ombudsman paper. So the first section is, again, an
extract from the Work Stream 1 report. Some discussion and
description of the Ombudsman role, what the Ombudsman’s
powers are and jurisdiction. This is stuff we’ve pulled from
existing documents.
And then the last section is the sort of some resources that we
think are useful. It’s a little bit more straightforward for some of
the topics rather than others, it just depends on the work that
we have and, of course, there’s some good – [inaudible]
reminded me that during the diversity talk this morning there
were some links shared in the chats so we’ve incorporated those
into the Diversity paper. We’ll be ready to share that with you
shortly.

Page 142 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

But again, as you come up with things and ideas, resources that
you’d like to include in these papers please feel free to do so. I’m
open for questions. I don’t know how we want to lead the
discussion.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Yes, John.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you. I noticed the list of papers that you described you
had both Ombudsman and Transparency. In the Work Stream 2
final document, the Ombudsman was part of Transparency. So
will you also be doing separate papers on the other elements –
the Whistle Blower and Interactions with Governments? Or have
we separated Ombudsman from Transparency?

MATHIEU WEILL:

I think Ombudsman is a separate issue from Transparency in the
final report. And it’s been all the way. So it might have been a
glitch in the way it’s presented, but it’s a separate issue. Any
other questions for Grace? Greg, is that an old hand? Apparently.
Okay. Brett.

Page 143 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

BRETT SCHAEFER:

In terms of the Ombudsman, I raised this issue during the end of
the CCWG final report which is under the IRP there is an
opportunity for a stay of decisions, and that is not currently the
case under the [RFR] process. The Ombudsman is the natural
place to put that power to have a stay or a decision not to
implement if irreparable harm could be done through an
implementation

of

a

decision.

That

was

under

that

consideration. I was told that that should be a discussion for
Work stream 2, and I just wanted to make sure that that wasn’t
overlooked in terms of the discussions that’s going to be going
forward.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Brett, I don’t think we’ve had any more discussions on this topic,
so I don’t think there’s any new elements. But does your
question imply that the way the paper is crafted is heading in
any way on this question?

BRETT SCHAEFER:

No, it was went through very quickly and I just wanted to make
sure that the point wasn’t lost.

MATHIEU WEILL:

We’re still in the same status. It’s as much on or off than it was
previously until the subgroup convenes and discusses about

Page 144 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

scope and everything. I can’t give any more because I wasn’t
maybe following this so closely that I can get at this level of
details. We’d have to go back to the documentation.

GRACE ABUHAMAD:

If I can suggest, Brett, I think we have the Ombudsman papers
now on the Google Doc and you can go ahead and put some
comments in if you’d like. Go ahead and insert some comments
into the document there and that would help kind of keep the
discussion moving.

BRETT SCHAEFER:

Okay. I’d appreciate that. And I’ll do that.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Brett. Greg.

GREG SHATAN:

Just a point of information for those of you who haven’t read
Steve Crocker’s blog is that Chris LaHatte will be departing I
believe at the end of July plus a three month consulting period
and that the current Adjunct Ombudsman will be the interim
Ombudsman until a new Chief Ombudsman is selected. That’s
not necessarily germane to the talk about the Ombudsman
position, I thought it was worth noting. Thank you.

Page 145 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

Thank you, Greg. It’s good noting and I think the subgroup that’s
going to be discussing on the Ombudsman should certainly
make sure that they get inputs from Chris’ experience as the
Ombudsman before obviously he moves to other ventures, and
that’s something that we need to keep in mind, benefiting from
his experience on this work group. Thank you for pointing that
out, Greg. And Chris, are you here in the room?
I have seen you earlier, but not yet. So we’ll have to also liaise
with him to express our appreciation of the continuous
engagement that Chris had in the Work Stream 1 process in a
very productive manner as a participant in addition to his
Ombudsman duties.
And I think, Grace, is that a new hand? You would like to add
something.

GRACE ABUHAMAD:

Everyone, this is just a quick request. We draft these papers
mainly for the subgroups to use as their starting points, but until
we have those subgroups formed, please feel free to suggest any
material or resources on the CCWG list or to me directly and I’ll
make sure they get included into the documents. We haven’t yet
kicked off those mailing lists. That may be something we do at

Page 146 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

the end of this meeting or as part of the discussion today. But
until that point and until we have Chairs for those subgroups, it
would be useful to keep the conversation going and we can
incorporate the work directly if you send them to staff.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Grace. My first suggestion would be to add the lightning
talks relevant to every section and maybe the extract of the
notes of this particular session so it’s not lost on the group when
they start. But obviously I encourage every one of you to
contribute to that effort. It’s an outstanding effort of
documentation which I’m certain will prove extremely useful as
we move towards a fact based relevant analysis of the various
gaps in the various topics. And I think it’s extremely important
that each of us gets familiar with these papers but also
contributes and suggests addition as we move forward.
And with that, thank you very much, Grace, for this short
introduction to the draft papers. And we’re going to get back to
lightning talks now for our third and last session. And to start
this session I’d like to call Steve DelBianco for a lightning talk on
SO/AC Accountability. Get ready for some SO/AC Accountability.

Page 147 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

STEVE DELBIANCO:

EN

Steve DelBianco with the Business Constituency, CSG Rep to the
CCWG. So this will be a quick five minutes and I hope a little bit
of discussion on SO and AC Accountability.
I’d like to start by shining a light – if you go to the first slide,
Grace, shine a little bit of light on… Well, what else? The Stress
Tests, right? The Stress Tests which are in Annex 15 – I’ve
memorized every last word of it – several of them actually
involve the failure of SO and AC Accountability. To whom? Well,
to the target communities that each SO and AC is designed to
serve.
For instance, Stress Test 31 looked at the question of rogue
voting. Do you remember that? A little over a year and a half ago
when we were voting, we were counting votes starting at the
Istanbul and Frankfurt meetings and we worried that the ALAC
vote might not be cast in accord to what the ALAC actually
decided. And whether you’re talking about voting or indicating
support or oppose – let’s just call that voting for purposes of this
discussion – it’s indicating a decision. Rogue voting or rogue
decision would be one where, “That’s not what we decided.
What did you come up with?” Well, to address that, our response
for Stress Test 31 is that if an AC or an SO rep expressed support
or opposition against the instructions of their underlying AC and
SO, we are going to write decision rules for the Empowered
Community. There would be procedures to invalidate the

Page 148 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

consensus call based on objections from any of the officers in
that AC and SO, or for that matter any member of the AC or SO
who says, “Wait a minute. That’s not what we decided. We
decided to abstain, or we decided to oppose and somebody
communicated that we supported the exercise of that
community power.” So we think we solved that one.
I’ll give you two other examples. Larry Strickling at NTIA one year
ago this month gave us four Stress Tests to add to our list, and
two of them in particular were on SO and AC Accountability.
Larry pressed us on internal capture in Stress Test 33 where the
members of an AC or an SO or even a constituency or
stakeholder group below that level have captured for their own
interests a decision that would have otherwise been made
differently, or when new members who are legitimately entitled
to be in that constituency or stakeholder group are excluded for
some reason of manipulated eligibility, a denial of their
application for membership. And I’d like to address how we
supported those.
So if you go to slide three, Grace. We did decide two mechanisms
to answer Larry Strickling’s two Stress Tests.
The first is that a disenfranchised member could challenge the
Board’s decision to follow advice using reconsideration or IRP.
So let’s suppose that GNSO came up with a recommendation,

Page 149 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

sent it over to the Board and the Board accepted the
recommendation and began to have staff implement it. If it
turned out that the GNSO’s decision making had been captured
by incumbent interests of one of the many GNSO constituents,
then I suppose that could be challenged. The Board’s decision to
accept could be challenged.
And what would the criteria be of evaluating that challenge? If it
were an IRP or a reconsideration they look to the core values
and mission statement which say that ICANN makes decisions in
an open, transparent, bottom-up, multistakeholder process. So
that would have to be what the IRP panel would look like. Was
there something wrong with the way the GNSO arrived at the
decision that they came up with and that the Board should not
have relied upon that when it made its decision.
So that is what we answered the Stress Test with. But Work
Stream 2 is about seeing if we can put a finer point on that and
make it a little more direct. Because that really feels like a rather
indirect way to challenge an SO/AC Accountability.
The second we put in for Stress Test 33 and 34 was we reminded
everyone of something that’s been in the Bylaws for a long time.
These are the periodic – that is to say every five years –
organizational reviews of the ACs and SOs. They’re directed by
the Board and staff, and they typically get an outside company

Page 150 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

to come in and do an evaluation. I’m not particularly enamored
of how those have gone from the standpoint of GNSO, but the
raw ingredient is in the Bylaws to make it go well. Because two
of the conditions that the Board is supposed to look at when it
reviews an AC and SO are whether any change in structure or
operations is desirable to improve the effectiveness of an AC and
SO.
What does effectiveness mean? The Board gets to decide that.
And I know that for my part I have asked every time, what is the
definition of effectiveness? Well, here’s our chance in Work
stream 2. Let’s make effectiveness about how well it serves the
interests of the target community.
The second is that the Board will also look in these five-year
reviews whether any SO or AC is exhibiting behavior that is
accountable to its constituency stakeholder groups and target
organizations. So that is supposed to be looked at in these
reviews that we do now. And those reviews are done for every AC
and SO except for the GAC, right? The GAC does not, in the
Bylaws suscept itself to having a review conducted by ICANN’s
Board. I encourage the GAC to conduct a review of similar
nature, even if you just did a self review.
Let me transition now because we described that these areas
are probably game for further improvements than we did in

Page 151 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Work Stream 1. So in our final report we came up with four
specific areas where SO and AC Accountability should be looked
at as part of this Work Stream 2 Bylaw. If you recall, we have a
Bylaw specifically defining how Work Stream 2 will be conducted
and the high bar of recommendations that come out of Work
Stream 2 that the Board has to accept it unless it can come up
with a public interest reason to reject our recommendations
with two-thirds of a Board vote.
So there are four of them. The first was this notion that the SO
and AC Accountability should be part of the Accountability and
Transparency reviews. Well, it’s there. Go to paragraph 89 of
Annex 9 on the AoC reviews – “Assessing the extent to which
ICANN’s decisions are embraced, supported, and accepted by
the public and the Internet community.” So those words live in
the Bylaws now under the ATRT instructions. So I hope that that
is broad enough to encompass but maybe it’s not specific
enough. It could be that in Work Stream 2 we put a finer point on
that and encourage the ATRT to look at the target community’s
accountability, not just the entire global Internet community.
The second one, which was to evaluate mutual accountability
round table idea. Two years ago this idea was suggested by our
advisor Willy Curry – is Willy here today? And it was supported
also by our advisor Jan Scholte – and I think Jan is here. Now
Willy proposed in writing – I had to dig back into our archives to

Page 152 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

find this – how this would work. He said, “It’s a round table of
the Board, CEO, and all supporting AC and SO Chairs. They
would pick a key issue to examine. Each would describe how
their constituency addressed the issue, indicating what worked
and didn’t work. Then there would be a discussion to create a
space for mutual accountability and a learning space for
improvement.”
So, Willy, that sounds good – wherever you are, Willy – but I
guess we would need to see it in action to understand whether
that will be an improvement over the reviews and mechanisms
and challenges we have in place. So one of our goals in Work
Stream 2 is to evaluate this mutually accountability round table.
The third is, do a detailed plan on enhancing accountability as
part of Work Stream 2. I think that’s self-evident. That’s really
what one, two, and four are about.
And the fourth one was to assess – and this is a tricky question –
whether we want the IRP – the Independent Review Process – to
be applicable to an SO and an AC activity.
So in GNSO where I live, if GNSO was undertaking a particular
policy, could that be challenged within the GNSO by invoking an
Independent

Review

Process?

Because

currently,

the

Independent Review Process is for action or inaction of ICANN’s,
the corporation’s Board and management. We don’t bring it

Page 153 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

down to the level of our ACs and SOs. So that’s an open question
for us to consider in Work Stream 2.
Now, I did earlier indicate that Stress Test 33 and 34, I indicated
in the Stress Test response that we can challenge the Board’s
acceptance of a tainted decision that wasn’t truly accountable,
but it’s a different matter to do an IRP or reconsideration within
the GNSO or within an AC and SO. I think that it possible that you
would challenge decisions that are made, but you might also
challenge a Charter if it’s exclusionary of individuals or entities
that would otherwise be part of the target corporation.
So let me conclude with the last slide, Grace, it’s on a proposed
approach. Since I think in a lightning round just as Phil Corwin
did, it’s provocative to suggest an approach and then take the
arrows from the rest of you in the room.
The SO and AC outreach to their community, in order to make
sure they serve their targeted community that they have them
on their rosters is a matter of effort and we are not going to be
able to always demand that the results of accountability can be
quantitatively measured. It is sometimes just our best effort. I
know in Business Constituency to reach out to smaller
businesses in different parts of the world – and that isn’t just a
diversity requirement, I wouldn’t call that diversity at all – for us,
our core membership are businesses who are registrants and

Page 154 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

users of the Internet and we have an awful lot from North
America and Europe but not enough from other parts of the
world.
So in order for us to serve our target community, we need more
of those community members to be vocal. So I don’t see that as
a diversity, it’s simply completing the collection of a target
community. So I think that that is going to be very difficult to
measure if you wanted to actually do statistical analysis of
where they all come from. And that’s because of the second
bullet.
I believe that an SO and AC is accountable to the stakeholders
who actually determine that it’s worth their while to participate
and assert their views, to join a working group, to join the
Business Constituency, to vote when we’re putting positions up,
to draft positions that we have. And that investment is one that
is an indication of how important they think it is.
There are going to be times that entities from different parts of
our constituency are just going to take a pass. They’re not
actually interested in the policy we’re working on. And their nonparticipation doesn’t mean that the SO and AC is not
accountable. It will change over time.
And that brings me to the final bullet here, the effectiveness of
an AC and SO policy in serving the targeted community, is more

Page 155 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

important than whether the AC and SO made its decisions with
full

participation

of

all

conceivable

stakeholders.

So

effectiveness – getting back to what the organizational reviews
have to look at – we need to work on the definition of
effectiveness that says, “Is it serving the interests of this targeted
community?” as opposed to “We don’t know whether it’s serving
their interests but we know they were all in the room when they
voted.”
So I’ll close with an example. Britain made a momentous
decision to leave the EU last week, and that decision was tallied
only from the 70% of Brits who voted. Not the 30% who failed to
vote. But the interests of all Brits must be considered in how that
decision gets implemented. So the participation rate could be
less than 100% in making a decision but you need to be 100%
conscious of your target community as you implement a
decision that was made.
So thank you. I’ll take a queue of questions.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you very much, Steve. And first in line is Thomas Rickert.
Thomas, where are you?

Page 156 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

THOMAS RICKERT:

EN

French humor. Isn’t it nice? Steve, I have I guess it’s two
questions for you and that is with respect to the depth of
analysis or suggestions that you want to make. You’re focusing
at the SO/AC level. Would you include the constituencies in that
review?
Let me just give you two examples. Let’s say the Registrar
Stakeholder Group decided tomorrow that in order to become a
member of the Registrar Stakeholder Group you need to have
one million domain names under management. Or let’s assume
the ISPCP decided tomorrow that in order to become a member
of that group you need to have an annual turnover of at least
500 million or what have you. Or if you started charging
membership fees. Where do you see the line of what should be
within and without outside of the mission of this task? Because
you were mentioning that SO/ACs need to be accountable to the
stakeholder groups who decide that it’s worthwhile to
participate and assert their views, and wouldn’t you agree that
this may be a little bit too narrow because those that can’t
afford to come to ICANN meetings but still care but it’s not
worthwhile because they might not want to spend their whole
annual budget on a travel to an ICANN meeting.
I guess you’re understanding what I’m trying to get to but maybe
we can inform the discussion by [soaping] a little bit.

Page 157 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

STEVE DELBIANCO:

EN

Thank you, Thomas. Grace, if you go to slide 3 for just a second
I’ll reiterate what is in our Bylaws already and has been for at
least 10 years. The periodic review of the GNSO, Thomas, looks
at little Roman numeral three there – whether an AC/SO Council
is accountable to its constituency stakeholder groups and
organizations. And I think your point is a good one. You have to
ask whether the constituency is accountable to its targeted
membership. So if a constituency itself has exclusionary
behavior preventing new entrants from getting in, that was part
of what Larry Strickling asked us about in Stress Test 34. And our
answer to that, to answer that Stress Test affirmatively, we have
to assume that it goes to the level that Thomas indicated.
So these reviews do look at the underlying constituencies – and
I’m aware that the GNSO review just concluded – did analyze the
degree to which our constituency, the Business Constituency,
had representation of its targeted community. So I believe it
should go to the constituency level in the targeted groups that
they serve.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Steve. I am closing the line after Bruce Tonkin
because we have quite a long line but it’s an important topic so
it’s good that we spend some time on this. But we also need to

Page 158 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

keep some time for the next topic which is going to be
Transparency. So next is Sam Eisner please.

SAMANTHA EISNER:

Thank you. Steve, I really appreciate the suggestion of needing a
definition of effectiveness as it relates to reviews. I think that
that’s a great suggestion. I heard Thomas talking about when
you’re looking at that effectiveness in that measure, looking
more internal into the subparts of the group. But I have a
concern of going into the exercise with the preconceived notion
that effectiveness is only measured by effectiveness to the
targeted community and not about what effectiveness might
mean in relation to other parts of the ICANN community as well.
So I think that that is another important component of an
organization can be serving its targeted community well but it
might not be effective as a mechanism or input or however it
might want to interact with the rest of the ICANN community,
and I think that that’s another important thing that should be
considered.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Page 159 of 262

Yes, good point. Go ahead next in the queue.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

MATHIEU WEILL:

The next in the queue is Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes, Steve. Thank you very much. I just first comment on one of
your issue raised that the participation. You put in question the
very fundamental issue in the entire world that participation,
your view would be 100%. If there is a voting for anything, any
democracy electing/selecting somebody, that you want that
100% of the people participate. No. It cannot be done. But if it
was 70% a very high degree of participation. What you want to
100%? How you can to do that? Is it not possible to go to the
100% of participations? You just change entirely the criteria.
That was a good thing but sometimes we have a decision based
on 40% participation, but the result of that decision based on
the majority has success on having simple majority. So I don’t
think that we can change that issue.
And then I would request you to come back to your four
elements. One of the elements that you want that the IRP will be
applied in the question number four. I think you make it quite
complex, the issue. We have sufficiently serious problem with
the application of IRP and you want to apply for that particular
question? It is very, very, difficult, very theoretical. And then with
this particular round table, I have no problem but round table
will be just a [show] talk, will talk and talk and so you could

Page 160 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

extend your views. We can get together, coffee, tea, and talk and
then until there is no way how to implement that. No problem.
Effectiveness definitions, I think we have tried to define
something, I don’t say what we have defined and we have not
succeeded. How you could define effectiveness and what are the
criteria you use to measure that effectiveness? So I think we
should a little bit go from theory to practice. Not put too much
theory in the process. Thank you.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thank you, Kavouss. I’ll answer those in reverse order and do it
quickly. The word “effectiveness” has been in the Bylaws for 12
years. We didn’t add the word. It’s there already and it’s part of
the organizational reviews. It doesn’t apply to the GACs, so it’s
not something you’ve had to endure, this forced march of a
review by an outside party.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible].

STEVE DELBIANCO :

I know, but AC/SOs like GNSO, we are subject to the
effectiveness word and as Sam indicated from staff, it’s up to the
Board to define it. And when we last did a review, when the RFPs

Page 161 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

went out to the firms, I led the BC on a comment to staff saying
let’s define what the word effectiveness means so when we hire
this outside consulting firm to evaluate the GNSO’s effectiveness
they’ll have a clue what they’re supposed to look at. Well, staff
and the Board declined to take me up on that offer, but maybe
that’s something we handle in Work Stream 2 is try to define
effectiveness both to the AC and SO and to Sam’s point perhaps
to the broader community.
Your second question was the IRP in round table. If you'll go to
the slide that has all four items, I believe it’s slide three. There
they go right there. Kavouss, this is in the report. These are the
words we put on paper, and the ICANN community and the
Board of Directors approved these words. That is why they’re
here: this notion of number four, of looking to whether the IRP
should be applicable to SO and AC activities. We’re not making
this up. This is in our approved report, and part of Work Stream 2
is to figure out if it will work.
Your first question was 100%. Go to slide five, Grace, if you
would, please. Kavouss, I naturally understand you'll never get
100%. I was making the point that whatever you get for
participation, turnout, as it were, you still have a responsibility
when it comes to implementing that decision to consider the
interests of 100% as you implement because there are people

Page 162 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

that lost that vote, but they are still constituents of the targeted
served community.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Steve. That’s a useful clarification, I think. A very short
follow-up, very short because the line is [inaudible].

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

I have no problem with question four [whether], but should we
take into account advantages and disadvantages going through
that process? Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Kavouss. Farzaneh, where are you? You are here.
Please.

FARZANEH BADII:

My question is because according to article four, section four of
the Bylaws, the GAC is not subject to this review and they should
provide their own reviews. I was also wondering if you are giving
them the liberty to decide if they are subject to this IRP or not, or
if they are going to even be considered in these accountability
reviews. Thank you.

Page 163 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

STEVE DELBIANCO:

EN

That’s a great question. I look forward to you being on the Work
Stream 2 SO/AC Accountability Team, along with GAC members
so we can explore that. I certainly don’t have a position going in.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Steve. Christopher.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

This is coming from the author of Stress Test 18. I’ve learned to
be a little more careful as I tread on GAC matters.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

You had already mentioned stress tests, which was the first level
of stress, and now you've even mentioned 18. I think that's going
too far.

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: Thank you, Christopher Wilkinson. Steve, thank you very much.
Really interesting and if I may say so, so far, so good. I agree with
question four. I’m also touched by the concern for the English
population, but I shall not comment further on that in this
context.
My only point for now is to make a link between this discussion
and the discussion we had this morning about diversity.
Whether it’s gender diversity or geographical diversity or
Page 164 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

diversity in other parameters. It transpired this morning that
whether it was at the level of appointments to the Board,
appointments to the Nominating Committee, appointments by
the SOs and the ACs to their own governing bodies, that the
issue of diversity is really somewhat entrenched in the whole of
the ICANN structure. I would strongly recommend that in
addition to all of the above, you have a number three and a half
or a couple more bullet points to address that SO and AC
accountability includes their responsibilities to respect the
obligations of ICANN on diversity.
As a footnote to that, I would echo I think what Cheryl also said
this morning, that the Nominating Committee cannot accept the
burden or responsibility for the whole of the diversity of the
ICANN structures insofar as the lack of diversity as an effect
imposed on the Nominating Committee by the SOs and ACs
themselves. That won’t do.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

[inaudible] I’ll answer just briefly. I believe that diversity is
something that informs the composition of the group, but
accountability to an AC/SO is about execution, not composition.
However composed, a decision will get made, and then it will be
implemented. It’s in that that you ask whether the AC/SO is

Page 165 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

serving the interests of the targeted community it was created to
serve.
At that point, that community has a theoretical definition, the
business constituency or global business users and registrants.
However the composition was, whether we were diverse, once
we’ve made a decision, our execution is really not looking at
diversity anymore.

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: Participants are part of execution and are included in
accountability.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Christopher. I think obviously there’s a link between
the two. I think that cannot be challenged. Jonathan.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thanks, Mathieu, and thanks, Steve, for your framework here. It
feels related to the discussion we had a little bit about diversity.
I’m with you that I think there is a separate issue associated with
accountability and implementation. It would surprise me if the
definition that appraisers of the SOs and ACs have fallen on in
the past was really very different from effectiveness in serving
the community that it was meant to represent. It would surprise

Page 166 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

me if the definition that they came up with was very diverse from
that.
It suggests that that, too, might be too general to be actionable
or measurable, that without a set of objectives for an
organization that might need to be created by that organization
so that there’s something with the greatest specificity on an
organization-based level, that they’re then held accountable for
later. Did you do the things you said you would do or accomplish
the things you said you would do and make the changes you
said you would do? That needs to be the basis for defining
effectiveness. Just saying, “effectiveness in serving your
constituency” isn’t too far removed from effectiveness. I guess
that's what I’m saying. We need to make it less top-down and
put the onus on these organizations to set objectives for
themselves and then be measured against those objectives. I
think that's the only thing that would work.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Jonathan. I think it’s an interesting comment to take
into account. Jan.

JAN AART SCHOLTE:

Likewise, Steve, really systematic and clear. That’s really helpful.
Just looking at the proposed approaches, just a couple of

Page 167 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

questions about clarifying some things. On the first point about
the effort, are you drawing a distinction between outputs and
outcomes here? Effort sounds like it’s just trying, and I think you
mean more than just trying, but that it’s the output. When you
say not just by results, is it not by results or not just by results?
Are you going to be looking at the results or not? I’ll just give you
a set of questions if that's okay.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

I would say if you started with results and the results exhibited
that your outreach efforts have been successful because you've
suddenly got business constituency members evenly spread
across the globe in proportion to population, that would be a
result that's self-evident that you've gotten the community that
you represent to be part of your members.
If that result doesn’t achieve, then the next thing you look at is
the level of effort at the outreach. The Business Constituency
works extremely hard at outreach, and we haven’t cracked the
code yet on how to make it happen, but our efforts could be
recognized even though the results may not be attained.

JAN AART SCHOLTE:

Maybe it’s not just a question of effort in the sense of trying, but
it might also be effort in the sense of mode because you might

Page 168 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

be working really hard but doing it the wrong way. In other
words, it’s not just about effort. You might want to look at the
mode as well as the effort.
The other thing is there’s this slight tendency in that line
perhaps to reduce accountability to outreach. I think
accountability is a lot more than outreach, so you might want to
look at that.
On the second line, I think it’s what Thomas already suggested.
You want to look at the reasons why people decide that it’s not
worthwhile. If they’re deciding it’s not worthwhile because they
don’t speak English and they’re not comfortable with the way
that the place works, it’s not because they didn’t think the issues
were not worthwhile. You perhaps want to look at the reasons
why people decide it’s not worthwhile.
At the very last, I suppose effectiveness and target community
are not self-evident. Again, even targeted community, ALAC
might not have seen the human rights organizations as part of
their target community seven years ago, but now they would.
Again, one might want to say that targeted community is
something to interrogate, as well. The existing AC/SO definition
of a targeted community might actually be excluding people
who want to be part of that community. They regard themselves

Page 169 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

as being part of the target, even though the existing
establishment doesn’t regard them as being part of the target.
Anyway, I think they’re all really great things, but maybe some
fine tuning of the language could help.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Jan, let me just thank you. All three points, I wrote down. In
particular, the target community is in the Bylaws where we
describe, “Here’s what ccNSO, their target community is.”
Country Code Name Supporting Organization. ALAC has a
targeted community that's defined in the Bylaws. You bring up
the point that perhaps that should be revisited or interpreted
from time to time to see if it’s excluding somebody who logically
would be part of it. All three of your points are excellent. I
appreciate that.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Steve. The next is Sebastien.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Yes, thank you very much. I think it’s very important to set that
target and to have new targets. We are talking about ALAC. In
fact, we need to talk about At-Large because it’s where our

Page 170 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

community is coming from and it’s what we try to represent
through the bottom-up process with a different organization.
For all the organizations, we need, I think, to be more
accountable to have a transparent process for selecting any
leaders for any position. That’s something we need to add in our
work to do the accountability approach. It’s something that it’s
not done and not very clearly in every part of this organization.
The last point is that we just not need to find a way to be
accountable to our own community in each silos, but as some
said, to the overall community. One SO to the other SO and AC,
and one AC to the other SO and ACs, it’s important. We work
hard to talk about the Board, but now we need to work hard to
talk about ourselves. Thank you.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thank you, Sebastien. In an ideal world, we’d have a true web of
accountability between and among the ACs and SOs. Let’s aspire
to that, but this particular Work Stream 2 thread is about
whether any given AC or SO is accountable to the stakeholders it
was supposed to serve. That does look internally, and the
external balancing act of their interest versus the global public
interest is something that we actually lean on the Board to do,
as guided by the Bylaws and core values that we’ve designed.

Page 171 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Steve. Last in line is Bruce.

BRUCE TONKIN:

Thank you, Mathieu. When I look at the second and third rows on
this slide, firstly starting with the second row, which is
accountable to the stakeholders, if you look at any market
sector, typically it has some sort of organization or association
that represents that sector. That organization often interacts
with government or with other parts of the community.
Typically, for a particular market sector, you'd hope that a
significant percentage of that market sector chooses to be
members of that organization. Obviously, a much smaller subset
of those members will be active members. Then there’s also
often a need to survey or somehow communicate with a wider
part of that market sector that chooses not to be a member of
that association.
If I compare ICANN and talk about some specific examples, if I
look at the Government Advisory Committee, the set of
members that could possibly be members of that group is
probably around a couple hundred. You would then look at the
current membership of that group and say it’s a pretty
representative set of members. In other words, there’s a

Page 172 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

significant portion of the 200 governments [that] are members
of the GAC. Then you would say that there’s a reasonable
portion of those members that are fairly active.
I think it’s a good structure for row 2 in that if the GAC is
genuinely accountable to the members of that GAC and doing
what the members want to do, it’s pretty reflective of the set of
governments. Likewise, if you look at the ccNSO, there’s a
couple hundred ccTLDs. There’s a reasonable proportion of
those ccTLDs that are members of the ccNSO, and then a
reasonable portion of those, in turn, that are quite active. I think
it’s a solid structure for that.
I think it gets much more difficult when you’re looking at sectors
that are very large. You’re obviously a member of the Business
Constituency. We’re not talking a couple of hundred. We’re
probably talking a billion. There’s probably a billion businesses.
If you said, “How many of those billion are members?” A tiny
portion.
The question then is, “What is a reasonable number?” I think this
picks up some of the diversity things. At least you’d hope that –
obviously, you don’t have a billion members, but even if you had
100 members – that the 100 members were kind of a fairly
diverse sample set. I think it’s one of the things that we need to
make sure, that of these big groups – ALAC’s another example.

Page 173 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Several billion people on the planet that use the Internet, the
numbers of people that [are] directly in ALAC is much smaller
than that. The number of those that are active, much smaller
again.
I think one of our real struggles is these really big sectors: the
business sector, the non-commercial sector, the individual
citizen sector. Massive. How do we make sure that we’re getting
a representative sample that are members, which is your row 2?
Then your row 3. I think those really big groups probably need to
be looking at how do they systematically do some kind of
surveys or something to engage the wider pool? The business
constituency, if you had a billion people that could be a
member, let’s say you have 100 members. I think you have to do
something systemically beyond that 100 members to ensure
that you actually are meeting that last requirement. In other
words, how do you measure that you’re effective?

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Excellent point. You hit it on the head, and that’s why I kept
using my BC as an example because it’s such a challenge to have
representation of the different subsectors and segments in the
business user community. Those who participate sometimes is
very few that will be able to dive into the arcane details of the
UDRP policy or a new gTLD round. Thanks, Bruce.

Page 174 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

Thanks a lot, Steve, and thanks for the lightning talk and getting
us in pace for this important topic.
I will now invite Avri to join for a transparency lightning talk. I
think the takeaways on these items are really about speaking
about accountability to the targeted membership. A bonus
would be that we can also work on the other web within ICANN.
Obviously, the definition of effectiveness is probably going to be
an interesting issue to explore in this work. The scope, also,
we’ve clarified includes constituency, stakeholder groups, and
various subgroups. I’ve also noted support for the mutual
accountability roundtable [restoration]. That’s worth noting.
I will finish with a final personal note that when we were in
Frankfurt last year, about 18 months ago, we developed a
framework for accountability with transparency, consultation,
review, redress, etc. I strongly suggest that this framework be
included in the background paper for this particular topic
because it would be extremely useful to build upon something
that we’ve shared together before that.
With that, I am now deleted to welcome Avri for a talk on
transparency.

Page 175 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Thank you. I’m delighted to be up here. Apologies, I have no
slides. I have no funny pictures. I probably won’t be funny at all.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Good stuff.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. Transparency is a subject that comes up whenever
accountability is talked about. We’ve talked about transparency
in every one of the accountability reviews that we’ve had. One of
the things that came up in the ATRT 2, which was a reference
back to ATRT 1, which was a reference back to reviews that had
been done before, was the culture of transparency and a
discussion of the fact that we don’t have a culture of
transparency. We have a culture of opacity.
What I mean is in a culture of transparency, everything is open to
view except for those things that you decide to close. In a culture
of opacity, everything is hidden except for those things that you
decide to show. We definitely are in a culture of opacity, even
though the ATRT 2 did recommend that we start moving
towards a culture of transparency.
A culture of transparency doesn’t mean that there aren’t things
that aren’t secret, that there aren’t things that go according to
Chatham House. It means that you intentionally decide at each

Page 176 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

point. “Aha. This is something that has to do with privacy of an
individual. This is something that has to do with corporate
negotiations and therefore must be secret, or at least must be
secret for some point of time.”
In a culture of transparency, you have a set of reasons for what
things can be hidden, and you log them. You actually say, “There
are documents on X and those have been put away because of
reason Y.” You have that. In a culture of transparency, you
occasionally go back and you say, “Those things that we hid five
or ten years ago, do they need to remain hidden? Can we start
revealing some of the stuff that we did keep secret?”
While ICANN has been improving remarkably in terms of
revealing things that it keeps secret, it still has a long way to go.
When you look at the DIDP, the Document Information
Disclosure, you find that a lot of the time, people don’t even
know the specific document to refer to. They know that
something was talked about. They know there was a decision,
but in terms of being able to refer specifically to what they want,
it’s very difficult because there isn’t even a transparency about
what we’re hiding. We don’t even know what secrets there are.
Of course, anybody who’s worked in secrecy knows that the first
objective in being secret is not let anyone know you have a
secret. One of the things that we really need to look at in

Page 177 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

transparency work is how do we change? Do we really want to
change? Just because ATRT has recommended it doesn’t mean
that we necessarily want it. I think we do.
If indeed we do want a culture of transparency, how can we
move there? What does it mean? What are the good reasons for
opacity? What are the good reasons for having a review to let
something become visible that wasn’t visible?
One of the things we have to think about when we talk about
accountability of the SOs, the ACs, or even the staff is the
transparency. A lot of what we’re doing, even in the SOs and ACs,
are not transparent. Some of them attempt to be. GNSO and AtLarge or ALAC make a very strong attempt to be transparent, at
least at the top level, though not necessarily all of the
constituencies and stakeholder groups and RALOs beneath
them are. For the other part, it’s very varied.
We really have to have a good concept of transparency in order
to be able to start talking about accountability, and how can you
be accountable if you're not transparent? Very much,
transparency does feed into that.
The last thing that I wanted to mention on that, which refers to
accountability – and nobody did a lightning talk on this – was
the topic of staff accountability. One of the things that we have
to realize is that we live in a situation where the staff has trouble

Page 178 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

being transparent. How often have any of us heard things like, “I
can’t talk about that,” or “It would be worth my job to tell you
what really happened,” or the things said with a sad little smile:
“I couldn’t possibly comment?” This is purely a subjective
judgment on my part, but you see a sort of fear in many of the
employees about what they may or may not say.
We do have a whistleblowing mechanism. As far as I can tell, it’s
not used very often. ATRT 2 did a review of it and decided that it
really needed a more professional review to see the extent to
which it worked. In a transparent, culture, whistleblowing
should almost be unnecessary. It should still be possible. It
should be safe. It shouldn’t cost somebody their job or their
future, but it should almost be unnecessary.
I think that when we start talking about staff accountability, we
have to do it with a view to making sure that they have access to
being transparent. For the institution itself, what goes on in that
very large part of ICANN that is the staff needs to be transparent
to all of us anyhow. Therefore, without good whistleblowing,
without staff feeling the freedom to explain why they do things
they do, for them to explain the regime they live under with the
various bosses and what they are told and what they are not
told, we have trouble talking about accountability at all.
Thanks. What’s what I wanted to say about transparency.

Page 179 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

Thank you very much, Avri. You actually covered almost two
topics in one talk. That’s quite amazing.

AVRI DORIA:

[inaudible].

MATHIEU WEILL:

I think that's efficiency. How do you define efficiency?
We can take a few questions for Avri on those issues if there are
any. Kavouss, I assume this is an old hand in the AC room. I see
Fiona. Are you in the AC room as well, Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

I was just going to suggest that maybe I can go on and then
people comment on both because there’s a huge amount of
overlap between what I was going to say and [inaudible]

MATHIEU WEILL:

There’s going to be a break in between because I think many of
us will need to make a break to have their minds refreshed for
the discussion. My suggestion is to take a few questions.
Obviously, if the line is too long, the discussion will go on after
Alan and Ed have had the opportunity also to speak up. Fiona.

Page 180 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

FIONA ASONGA:

EN

Thank you, Mathieu. Mine is just a question I’d like to pose in
reference to what Avri has just raised. She has mentioned that
the issue of transparency cannot be discussed in isolation
without discussing accountability because every time you have
to look at accountability issues, the question of transparency
has to come into play. I would just like to pose a question to
everyone. As we go through the lightning talks, I’m realizing that
there are a number of overlaps on some of the issues. Will we at
one point consider those overlaps and see which areas can
practically be merged? Have we really looked at [inaudible] that
we continue as is? Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

The plan is that every recommendation is discussed by the
CCWG as a whole in order to make sure we don’t introduce
contradictions between our recommendations. I think that's the
way we will address this. That’s the first order of addressing it.
In some cases, we might request two subgroups to liaise and
coordinate upon a certain topic or subtopic because obviously
there are links between the various items. I hope that addresses
your question, Fiona.
I lost my list here, but I think next is Kavouss.

Page 181 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

I don’t think that we should exaggerate the scope of
transparency to the extent that we intervene and bypass the
hierarchical management in the name of transparency and
asking or interrogating the staff no matter at what level to say
whatever which has not been coordinated, which has not been
discussed. Based on his or her understanding or her
presumption or impression of the situation, which may not
reflect the reality. We should be quite careful not to go to that
extent.
In fact, having some definition for transparency, transparency is
something that you will open unless [the team] that you decide
not to open. It is not transparency. It is partial transparency.
Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you very much, Kavouss. Would you like to comment?

AVRI DORIA:

Just a quick one. I don’t think that I actually meant to put in any
notion of interrogating the staff. I think it was the notion of a
freedom for the staff to speak.

Page 182 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Avri. Sam, you're next.

SAMANTHA EISNER:

Thanks. I have a similar line of concern as Kavouss mentioned. I
think as the Work Stream 2 for staff accountability was scoped,
there’s a lot of emphasis put onto understanding how staff is to
relate to the community and the lines of responsibility, those
lines of authority. I think those are things that really would
benefit all of us to understand. We need to understand what to
expect of each other, what you can expect of me when you come
to me versus going to my boss versus going to the Board. Those
are things that make sense.
Though I’d encourage when we get into the issue of staff
transparency, because staff accountability could be different
from staff transparency. People get concerned when they’re on
staff, not because they’re told that they shouldn’t talk, but
because we recognize that we hold a responsibility, both to the
organization and to the community. There needs to be an
understanding that when I say something as ICANN staff, I’m
often considered as speaking on behalf of the organization. I
don’t have authority to make many decisions on behalf of the
organization or to state a position. We’re all very conscious of
making sure that we don’t add confusion to situations or put

Page 183 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

things in that might actually hinder our ability to continue to
relate to each other appropriately.
As we move through the staff accountability, I know that a good
section of that will have to be, how do we communicate with
each other? We make sure that there’s a base understanding of
the restrictions that staff believes they’re operating under as
well, and not assumptions. I think that there’s a lot of need to
make sure that we have a common understanding and that the
conversation is done actually with staff, and that we’re seen as
an effective part of that conversation so that it’s not based on
things that might not actually be in place or might not be
addressing situations that don’t need to be addressed.

MATHIEU WEILL:

[Would you] like to comment?

AVRI DORIA:

Certainly, there’s a difference because discretion and keeping
things hidden because of fear. I think that you can often tell the
difference between the two in the interactions. Of course,
there’s a difference, but still within a culture of transparency,
more can be talked about. Certainly, I’m not in a position to say.
We all have that, even within the SOs and ACs. I’m in the NCSG,

Page 184 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

but I hold no office, so I can voice an opinion, but I always have
to say, “But it’s just an opinion. It’s meaningless.”
This happened with a question asked before. “Aren’t the staff
stakeholders too?” I’ve tried to say, and you’ve probably heard
me try to say, “Of course they are. They are of a different sort,
but then again, each of the stakeholders is of a different sort.”
But if you're going to consider them stakeholders, then they
have to be acting within their own stake and not only under
orders to act. They have to have the ability to talk. They have to
have the ability to have known constraints, but also be free.
When we get into those discussions, that's really the kind of
meat that I would love to see this get into.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Avri. We’re not far from staff unions in this
discussion. I’m looking forward to bring my French expertise on
that.
Steve.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thank you. In the chat, I pasted the four items of transparency
that are in our report and are now in ICANN’s Bylaws. We have
four specific areas of transparency in Work Stream 2 that we

Page 185 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

have to look at. I enjoyed every minute of Avri’s discussion of
staff accountability as a function of transparency. I get that we’ll
have to cover transparency in the staff accountability, but with
respect to the four things that we have to look at in transparency
as part of our new Bylaws, it’s rather constrained. It’s the
document inspection, the DIDP, Board deliberations, ICANN’s
interactions with governments and the whistleblower policy.
I look forward to the next set of lightning talks, but we need to
focus on that which we’ve already approved and begun, or we’re
not going to be able to satisfy what the Bylaws require of us right
now.

MATHIEU WEILL:

At the same time, as I said, Avri was somehow addressing two
topics at the same time. That can fit the other topic.
The plan was to break now, but I have three more speakers, so I
will provide you with the choice of either speaking now and
delaying the break shortly or wait for the next discussions on
transparency, which will take place and be first in line for that
follow-up discussion. Chris?

Page 186 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: I’ll be very, very briefly. Seriously, I just wanted to pick up on
something specific Avri said when she was talking about fear
and the difference between. I’m here, Avri.
I don't know where this is going to go and how this will move
forward, but if I can just recommend, we do actually have in this
community people who have been in the community and on the
staff, and come off the staff and come back into the community.
We have got the ability, if we choose to do so, to do some real
research for want of a better way of putting it, of actually asking
what happens in real life. It could even be anonymous and
protected. I just wanted to mention that.

AVRI DORIA:

Thanks. Believe it or not, in the context of ATRT 2, I did indeed
do some of that and think it would be really valuable to some
more of that.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Excellent suggestion. Jonathan.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thanks, Mathieu, and thanks, Avri, for your presentation. I
appreciate your comments about a culture of transparency. I
just have one caution, and that is that at least it’s been my

Page 187 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

experience that transparency is not an end unto itself, but
instead really a tool of accountability.
What we’re really looking at is effective transparency, not just
blanket transparency where people are overwhelmed. You have
obscurity through transparency by having too many types of
materials. Actually, developing a culture of accountability is the
umbrella concept under which we develop transparency
practices that actually have an impact of greater accountability
because transparency is, I believe, a means to an end and not an
end unto itself.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Short comment, Avri?

AVRI DORIA:

I would actually probably argue, if we were sitting down and
being philosophical, that it is both. That transparency is
important in itself and it is important as a means to other things,
to accountability. I believe, and this would be a long
philosophical conversation, about why it is actually important in
and of itself.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Page 188 of 262

Thank you. [inaudible] now, please.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

EN

Thank you very much. I just want to clarify a little bit on one
point Avri said. In particular, whether ICANN staff is a
stakeholder, I understand within ICANN as an organization, sure,
staff is a stakeholder. In a broader sense outside ICANN, I don't
know. Do we all share that ICANN staff is a separate stakeholder
than ICANN? Whether we see that, how can we indeed see ICANN
as one body that is accountable as one? If we start separating
staff with the Board and so on, then how can that help us having
ICANN as one accountable body? That’s my question.

AVRI DORIA:

I probably am in a minority that argues that staff itself have a
very special stake that is different than the role of ICANN itself.
They are people. They are employees. They are subject to not
quite the union, but indeed, as people, employed and they have
a specific stake that is affected by ICANN itself. As I said, a very
different sort of stakeholder. It wasn’t what I was asked to talk
about, but I would argue that yes, they do. That doesn’t change
ICANN the corporation’s responsibility, but there’s also staff
members as people who are stakeholders in what happens to
ICANN.

Page 189 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

Thank you, Avri. Christopher, I’m sorry, but I closed the queue
twice. Make it very short because we really need to leave space
for the last two lightning talks. It’s still going to be about
transparency, so you'll still have room for [inaudible].

CHRISTOPHER WILKINSON: I understand your point of view, and thank you. For the sake of
argument, a few weeks ago, I would have shared [Athena’s]
qualifications, but the recent discussion of the staffing of the PTI
leads me to the conclusion that unfortunately, it is the CWG itself
who has created the fact that the ICANN staff, particularly in
IANA, have become a stakeholder in their own right.

AVRI DORIA:

I thought they were before that, so sure.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Any last words, Avri, before we break?

AVRI DORIA:

I never have last words.

Page 190 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

I know. That’s why I’m asking. With that, break for 15 minutes.
We reconvene at 25. Stay tuned because we will keep discussing
transparency. Thank you very much.
Okay, everyone. We’re going to reconvene. If you would be kind
enough to get back to your seats. Alan, maybe you could join us
on the table as you are the next speaker.
Can I ask you all to be seated? We are going to resume our
session on transparency. We have two remaining talks, one from
Alan Greenberg and the other from Ed Morris. I will now leave
the floor to Alan for his lightning talk.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you, and I hope it will be very lightning. I don't think I can
stretch this out to five minutes. First slide.
Avri mentioned the expression, culture of transparency. The
other expression that was used in ATRT 2 was transparency
should be in the DNA of ICANN. You shouldn’t have to invoke a
Freedom of Information Act or the names of various national
legislations to try to get information, if indeed you can even find
out the information exists.
Next slide.

Page 191 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

That’s true, particularly if the information is largely unimportant
and innocuous.
Next slide.
If trivial information is impossible to get, we have to presume
that more substantive information is also not available, and
there’s going to be a reluctance to present it. ICANN has lots of
information on the web. There’s no shortage of things people
can point to. At times, I’ve often thought that something wasn’t
available, and in fact, someone said, “Oh yes, it is there,” and
pointed me to the page. Then I would ask, “How would you have
expected me to find that page, since the webpages don’t have,
as many others do, a breadcrumb trail of saying where is it on
the hierarchy? It’s just a page. It is linked, but you can’t find it.”
The presence of information doesn’t necessarily mean it’s
correct or accurate because there are times when it seems that
ICANN has been more intrigued with presenting information
than making sure it’s actually usable.
Next slide.
I’ll give a couple of real life examples from the days I live. I, in the
last few months, regularly got information from somebody, or
rather an e-mail from somebody. Never heard the name before. I
would go to the ICANN directory, and the name’s usually there.

Page 192 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

They’re very good at putting names of new employees in
directories. Sometimes it even says how recently they’ve been
hired. It doesn’t say what department they work for. It doesn’t
say who they are in any context at all. I’ve on occasion asked my
staff support, “Who is this person?” The answer often is, “I don't
know. I’ll check.” Eventually, someone comes back and says,
“They work in such and such a department.”
If you have a problem with dealing with someone, the natural
thing is – and Sam mentioned her manager, her boss. Try to find
out who someone’s manager is sometimes. ICANN published the
executive organization chart. Doesn’t publish anything under it,
and sometimes it is literally impossible to find out if X reports to
Y or Y reports to X. It’s not obvious from how they deal with the
public. If a decision is handed down, who made the decision?
Who can I appeal to? It’s an unknown in the past. Some of these
things get really difficult. Then you have information which is
clearly disclosed, but not quite right.
Next slide.
I’ll tell you, this is not on the web right now. Thanks to the
Wayback Machine, things that ICANN published last year will live
on forever. Here it says that Akram Atallah is the owner of
contractual compliance. You may remember there was a WHOIS
review that talked about where compliance should report, and

Page 193 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

there’s been some dispute. Just in case you aren’t sure what the
word owner means, it’s defined.
Next slide.
Owner is the name identified with each entry that is responsible
for the work in ICANN.
Next slide.
What we were told when this was identified by one of our
people, that Akram Atallah has nothing to do with compliance.
He is not responsible for the budgets. They’re managed solely by
someone else, and that person reports directly to the CEO. Go
back to the previous slide.
How can you reconcile that to an innocent person looking at the
web, these two facts? Who do you want to believe, the pretty
picture or what we were told offline? Go ahead, please. The next
one.
Where does transparency start? Next slide.
It’s got to be everywhere. It really does. Next slide.
There’s going to be a cost to transparency. It’s largely in time
and effort. It takes time to fill in those directory items where
someone is in a department. It takes time to say where they
moved when they changed departments, but it’s really

Page 194 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

important. I’m told there used to be an internal distribution
when someone changed departments, so at least the staff would
know when someone moved. I’m told that doesn’t get done
anymore at all.
Next slide.
I disagree that transparency is only for accountability.
Transparency, if it’s really there, gives trust. We have been sadly
lacking in trust at ICANN in many ways. There are some people
who believe that this whole accountability thing might have
been avoided if we had had trust in the Board and in some other
parts of ICANN over the last several years. Maybe yes, maybe no.
It’s moot, too late to turn back the clock, but trust is really
important. In the absence of information, people presume the
worst.
Next slide.
As the examples I’ve given, if completely innocuous information
is impossible to get, then it’s going to be second nature to
suppress the stuff you really don’t want people to see. We really,
really need to make sure that information is available, it is not
easy to hide and doesn’t have the incentive to hide it. Right now,
the comments Avri made about staff being reluctant to say
things, I can’t tell you how many times I hear, “There’s

Page 195 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

something going on, but I can’t tell you about it yet.” Sometimes
that goes on for several years.
It’s discouraging in an organization that prides itself with being
open and transparent. That’s not the way some of us end up
seeing it. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you very much, Alan. That was lightning, very to the point.
I’m going to turn to Siva for a question or comment, and then I’ll
ask you whether you think this is more on the transparency
subgroup or on the staff accountability subgroup. First, just to
give you some heads up, and Siva.

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

Alan, I agree with all of your observations about transparency
and the need for transparency, but I have a totally opposite
question. Do you have any exceptions to the position that
everything should be transparent? Have you thought of any
situation? I’ll just give an imaginary scenario. What if ICANN
Board was to make a decision that would affect the stock
markets? How transparent should the deliberations be? It is
required to be kept confidential. Likewise, have you identified
exceptions to the rule of transparency where certain matters

Page 196 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

have to be deliberated in secrecy or in closed doors? Who do you
approve of such exceptions? Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Of course. There is a huge number of things that cannot be
revealed at any given time. There are things that probably will
not be able to be revealed for a long time. There are certainly
time-sensitive issues. The list couldn’t go on and on. That’s not
the issue.
The issue is where there is no reason to not disclose something,
why is it a secret? There’s no shortage of things that cannot be
revealed at any given time to any given person for completely
valid reasons.
I’ll just add that you cannot really unweave the intersection of
transparency and staff accountability. How can you hold staff to
be accountable when you can’t find out who it was that did
something?

MATHIEU WEILL:

There’s no question that transparency of staff in terms of who’s
doing what and so on can be a very significant part of staff
accountability, but compared to the four items we had identified
in a transparency subgroup, there seems to be a little disconnect
because the only aspects related to staff transparency is the

Page 197 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

whistleblower policy. I’m wondering whether because of the
way our mandate is framed as Work Stream 2, whether it would
not be more appropriate to carry the concerns that you
legitimately raise through the staff Accountability subgroup,
rather than the Transparency subgroup, which is really framed
into only four topics. Maybe it’s just food for thought after this
meeting.
The next is Tijani.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Thank you, Mathieu. Tijani speaking. I agree with you, Alan, that
the alternative of transparency is lack of trust. I do believe that
there is a lack of trust. That’s why we don’t have the
transparency.
The discretion doesn’t bother me at all, but the lack of trust do.
This is at all levels. Sometimes, the information concerns you
and you don’t have it. It is hidden from you. This is a lack of
transparency for me. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Page 198 of 262

Thank you, Tijani. Want to comment? No? Thank you. Kavouss.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

Yes. Thank you very much. You go to some countries and you
look in the telephone directory, you don’t find the name. You ask
the information. It says that the owner of the telephone does not
want that his name appears in the booklet. How you can talk
about that? We don’t want someone registered in a conference,
it is asked, “Do you want that your name appears in the e-mail?”
“No. I don’t want appear it to appear in the e-mail.” It is not lack
of transparency. It is personal decision. Some people, they do
not want.
There are some addresses or something that people continue to
ask question and make problem and does not allow that person
to work properly, then it is not a lack of transparency. It is
disturbance. We should think it over, also. There are some
occasions that it is causing problem. It is not harmless. Maybe
some, deeply harmful. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Kavoos. Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

As Siva asked, “Are there things that should not be transparent
just because they’re in ICANN’s record books?” Of course, and
individual privacy is one of those things that we have an

Page 199 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

obligation to protect, so certainly there are lots of things that
may be in that category that should not be released.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you. Next is [Cherin], and then we’ll move to Ed’s
presentation. [Cherin].

[CHERIN]:

Just a comment and a suggestion. I fully agree that improving
transparency will improve trust within the community,
particularly in relationship between the Board and the
community. I think that's very important.
The other thing it will improve, in my view, is the quality of the
deliberation and the quality of the decisions because this one
thing, you deliberate quietly, knowing it’s not going to be
recorded. Once you know it’s going to be public, you have to
improve your performance. You have to be much more careful
about execution. You have to be much more careful about the
rationale. You really have to think much harder, and I think
that's a plus for all of us.
In terms of the scope of the work, Steve DelBianco mentioned
those four elements. You said that the staff transparency ought
to be taken into account into the staff accountability. Actually, I
agree with that, but perhaps also when we do the SO and AC

Page 200 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

accountability, we ought to look at also transparency because
that's not one of the four things, as well. I think we need to be
transparent, like Alan said, everywhere. If we’re only transparent
in one part and not everywhere else, it is not complete. Thank
you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, [Cherin]. Indeed, this transparency will be part of the
discussions of SO/AC accountability, as well. Probably
transparency is everywhere in all of our topics. The
Transparency subgroup only has these four items to dig into
more deeply.
Alan, would you like closing remarks?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Just one. The transparency and staff accountability are woven
together. If you look at the entry I put in the Google Docs for this
talk, I mentioned I could have done this under staff
accountability. I had to pick one or the other. You didn’t give me
the option of a joint one, and I didn’t think you'd give me ten
minutes if I put it under both.

Page 201 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

MATHIEU WEILL:

EN

That was correct. You assumed correctly. You know us. Thank
you very much, Alan.
Our next speaker is Ed. Go ahead.

EDWARD MORRIS:

I follow the A Team of Avri and Alan, which is always an honor
and a difficult thing to do. My talk’s going to be a little bit
different. I want to focus on our work in WS2. As Steve pointed
out, we have four tasks we’ve been charged to do, and I’m going
to focus on one in particular. That is the reform of the DIDP and
a suggested way forward.
First, I want to take a broader point which I think can inform our
process going forward. In Work Stream 1 on this issue, this group
kicked butt. Getting inspection was something that members of
this community have been fighting for for a decade and a half.
The investigation right was something that most of us never
even thought of. The fact is, this community was led in the [end]
on this issue, not by ourselves, but by the ICANN Board.
Investigation was a Board proposal.
I think what that tells us is within the community, there is
definite consensus that what we’re trying to do is create a
corporation going forward that is open, transparent in a way
that frankly leads the world. What we’ve done in investigation

Page 202 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

and inspection makes us, in many ways, the most transparent
corporation in California that I’ve seen in the PBC laws.
How do we go ahead and do this? First of all, in some of the
other matters of whistleblower disclosure, what I would suggest
is we sometimes have the tendency in the CCWG to try to
recreate something that's already been done before. There’s a
ton of whistleblower policies out there. Why don’t we take a look
at what other organizations have done, and then take best
practices and try to adopt them here?
The DIDP is a little bit different because it’s [inaudible] to what
we do here at ICANN. Here’s my proposal going forward. First of
all, a lot of you may not know what a DIDP is. We talk about it
like everyone on the street knows what the Documentary
Information Disclosure Policy is. Basically, ICANN already claims
that it’s open and transparent. The default is transparency. If the
staff decides not to release documents on the website, you can
ask for one or ask for the document that exists through a DIDP
request. Then staff again decides whether or not to approve it. If
you disagree with the staff decision not to approve it – we’ll talk
about what they use to decide whether or not to give you the
document – it then goes to the Board through a reconsideration.
The Board has never contravened a staff decision not to release
a document.

Page 203 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Basically, what we have is the staff deciding what to release.
Then you ask for something that isn’t released. The staff decides
again not to release it, and then the only appeal are the folks
that are advised by staff not to release it. I think one of the
things we need to look at is an independent review and appeal
process for denials of documentation under the DIDP.
Let’s take a look at the DIDP itself. The document shall be
released unless it fits into one of 12 categories contained in
something known as the Defined Conditions of Non-Disclosure.
They were established years ago. That’s not enough. Staff is
also, before denying release of a document, supposed to
balance the reasoning for non-disclosure against the public
interest in disclosure. There are some of us who don’t believe
they do that. They do at times. I’ve gotten some contractual
information that they actually specifically stated, “We think it’s
in the public interest to release this.”
In the NCSG, we have sent some of our doctoral students out to
do research in this area. Unlike a lot of areas we have been
working on here, we have hard data now. I can tell you that
about 87% of DIDP requests are rejected, but through a study
that we released last week, [put] online by Sarah Clayton out at
USC, I can tell you that if your request is shorter, at least in
[inaudible] I believe it’s two times more chance of getting the
information than if you have a long request. If you were certain

Page 204 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

categories of requesters, you can be denied by some
subcategories, but inaudible]. In other words, there’s a lot of
arbitrary decisions being made. We want to end that. We want to
replace that with something that's knowable.
How do we go forward? I have a suggestion. As I’ve said, I’ve
seen a lot of cooperation with the Board and staff in trying to
make this work. What I do is I ask Sam and Jon and Amy and the
nice folks at ICANN Legal, “You have the 12 DCND conditions. Are
there any you think we can get rid of?” If they say, “We don’t
need this anymore,” it’s gone. For those that think we still need,
ask them to give a justification as to why we need this.
On the other hand, we have a lot of data on how the DCND has
been used or abused, depending upon your point of view. Once
we get ICANN Legal’s justification for having these exceptions to
a general policy of disclosure, we can then match it with the
data as to how it’s been used and as a community come up with
a decision as to whether we want to keep these exemptions
from a general rule of transparency.
I think that's a way forward that is practical, that allows us not
to have to reinvent the wheel, and actually could work. There’s
one thing I want to point out at the end. When we start talking
about transparency, ICANN is a really unique organization. It’s a
private corporation with a public duty and a public interest. At

Page 205 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

times, in the NCSG in particular, I have my members that go on
list and say, “Norway has this brilliant Freedom of Information
Act request, and by the way, I can’t wait until I get a DIDP
department to implement it.” Folks, we’re not going to have a
DIDP department, and we are not a country. At the same point,
some of my friends in some of the other communities are
coming on other lists and saying, “ICANN is a corporation. We
need to compare our disclosure policy to Coca-Cola.” That’s not
right either.
I think what we need to do is find a balance between what is
needed to become a truly transparent organization, but at the
same point, there is a need for some opaqueness and secrecy. As
a community and as a group, we have to sort out what that is.
I’ve suggested a way forward, at least with the DIDP, which in my
view is the big enchilada of this entire matter. Thanks.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you very much, Ed, for digging into one of the key
questions on transparency. Are there any questions for Ed?
This is surprising. Is this because you know he will disclose
anything you request?

CONSTANTINE ROUSSOS:

Page 206 of 262

I have a question. It’s Constantine from DotMusic.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

MATHIEU WEILL:

Sorry, Constantine.

CONSTANTINE ROUSSOS:

We actually have a DIDP reconsideration request right now, and
we have a question on the definition of the public interest. If
there’s no definition of the public interest, how can the staff
make a decision on the public interest? If they do make a
decision based on the public interest, why don’t they define the
public interest? We posed that question in our reconsideration,
and I guess we’re asking the BGC. Please let us know what the
definition is so we know how staff came about with this
decision. What is the definition of the public interest?

MATHIEU WEILL:

Can you disclose that, Ed? I’m not sure you can.

EDWARD MORRIS:

That is confidential. No.

MATHIEU WEILL:

What I can say on this is it’s been highly discussed on our mailing
lists about the definition of public interest. Our conclusion as a
working group, with no binding ability on anyone, was that we
were not going to attempt to define, and it was not our role. It

Page 207 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

was not our mandate. That’s all I can say. Many have been on
the record saying there is no agreed definition of public interest
across ICANN at this stage. Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. Just wanted to follow up. Avri had mentioned the
Whistleblower Act or Whistleblower whatever. There had been a
disclosure request filed on that quite a while ago, and it didn’t
get a particularly satisfactory answer. When the ATRT 2
requested the document, the first reaction, I think, was, “We
should file a disclosure request.” We said, “We’re an AoC review.
We shouldn’t have to file a piece of paper.” We were then told to
have the Chair of the committee ask the CEO of the organization
if we could see a copy.” We eventually did get a copy, a huge
amount of redactions, most of them telephone numbers of the
supplier, which we really didn’t care about. It’s that level of work
to get something which most corporations proudly post on their
website.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Alan. You don’t have to comment if you don’t want
to.

Page 208 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EDWARD MORRIS:

EN

If you look at the studies I mentioned, we’re seeing that ICANN
reflexively denies requests for information, rather than approves
them. I hold the record. I have a DIDP, the only one in history,
that had all 12 reasons of non-disclosure as listed for not giving
me the document.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Congratulations.

EDWARD MORRIS:

Lord knows. I went through seven requests, and when I got one
approved, we didn’t know what to do with it, literally. I asked for
the information. I got it, and I literally didn’t know what I wanted
to do with it because I didn’t expect to get it. That is our current
transparency policy, which is why we need to change it.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thanks, Ed. Steve, you're next in the line, please.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thanks. Ed, thank you for focusing on one of the four like you
did. It’s fine if that's the only one of the four that you wish to
work on. We’ll find other people to fill in the others. There’s
more than enough meat, and you have the experience firsthand
and the scars to prove it on DIDP. I don't think that folks who

Page 209 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

step up to the subgroups in Work Stream 2 have to necessarily
shoulder all three or four threads. Make this the one that you
lead, and we’ll recruit other volunteers to help. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Steve. One last question here. Can you state your
name?

BERIN SZOKA:

I’m Berin Szoka. I run a non-profit in the U.S. called
TechFreedom, a civil society group. I have two questions, if I
may. Maybe I can break them up to make this easier.
First question is, as to the transparency point, how much more
comfortable would you be if the community had gotten
membership rights under California law, which includes
statutory rights to get access to key documents that are
enforceable under California law?

EDWARD MORRIS:

I was very much in favor of membership. I believe the first
meeting was on December 9th, 2014. I mentioned membership in
meeting one. California law gives you inspection. We have
inspection. We ported the California statute and brought it back

Page 210 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

into our proposal – [that’s what’s] been approved by the Board –
into the Bylaws. We have inspection.
We even have more than inspection because the investigation
right is inspection plus. I know there have been some folks – Karl
Auerbach, for example – that say, “No, you want the statutory
power.” Yeah, I would have loved to have had membership, but
in terms of this narrow field, we have something better than
what’s provided under California statute, at least in my view.

BERIN SZOKA:

I’m not clear if the enforcement mechanisms are the same, if you
want to comment on that. But I did have another question
unrelated to that, unless you want to comment on enforcement.

EDWARD MORRIS:

As Steve says, it’s a Bylaws violation, and it can be enforced like
pretty much the entire – all of our Bylaws.

BERIN SZOKA:

My second question is to the question the gentleman over here
asked about the public interest standard. I’m a telecom lawyer.
Our Federal Communications Commission in the United States
operates under a public interest standard. I can tell you, after 80
plus years of the FCC operating under that standard, that it is no

Page 211 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

standard at all. It means nothing, other than that you can get a
majority of the commission to vote for something.
So I’m curious to know why anyone here thinks that the public
interest standard will mean anything other than that a majority
of the Board of the ICANN leadership will vote for something.
And in particular, what would be wrong with doing what other
agencies have done? For example, our Federal Trade
Commission has a similarly broad standard. It’s not the public
interest. It’s unfairness and deception. But it at least has issued
policy statements, just like the antitrust agencies have issued
guidelines, that give you more conceptual clarity on how the
agency will actually decide what its standards mean.
Now, it’s still up to a vote of those agencies, but at least they
have some standards to be held to so that they can have to
analyze in a detailed way what the public interest means.
I’ve read what’s in the current text, and it doesn’t seem to me to
do anything to really constrain the discretion of the agencies. So
what makes us think that this is not simply going to resolve into
ultimately political decisions?

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you for your question. You’re giving me the opportunity to
correct something I’ve said. There is something in our proposal

Page 212 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

about public interests. If you read the draft articles of
incorporation, there is a reference to public interest as
determined from time to time by bottom-up multi-stakeholder
processes.
Becky, would you like to give the exact wording?

BECKY BURR:

Yes, and it appears in two places. It does appear in the mission
commitment and core values, where we say that the global
public interest should be determined by the bottom-up multistakeholder process and in the articles of incorporation.
The notion was that we didn’t want a sort of imposed on from a
far concept, that the purpose here, rather than trying to define
pie-in-the-sky is that the policy development process at ICANN,
the bottom-up multi-stakeholder process, would be the source
of the global public interest.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you, Becky. I think, with that, we will – oh, no, we need to
turn to Anne for maybe the last word on this before we move to
the next agenda item. Anne?

Page 213 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

ANNE AIKMAN-SCALESE:

EN

Hi. It’s Anne Aikman-Scalese with the IPC. I just wanted to report
that, historically, the working group was advised – this one – by
ICANN staff that there was a tentative definition of global public
interest that was arrived at in May of 2014 and defined global
public interest as follows: ensuring that the Internet becomes
and continues to be stable, inclusive, and accessible across the
globe so that all may enjoy the benefits of a single and open
Internet. In addressing its public responsibility, ICANN must
build trust in the Internet and its governance ecosystem.
I don’t honestly know what sort of community testing this
tentative definition had gone through; whether it can be viewed
as a bottom-up definition or what it was intended for – the
purpose of that at that time – but it was something that staff had
reported to our working group. Thank you.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Thank you very much, Anne. I think this will be our opportunity
to thank Ed for his talk.
From this talk, I would point out a few takeaway. On
transparency, obviously let’s all remember what we got from
Work Stream 1: inspection and investigation are important steps
forward. The institution of a culture of transparency is certainly
something that we need to refine. Obviously, some work needs
to be done related to the twelve conditions. I appreciate the

Page 214 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

offer to do this investigation based on facts and actual
experience and certainly will be expecting something back on
this from the subgroup, and also to focus on the four items that
have been identified in the report.
We’ve also covered staff accountability quite a bit in this section.
So I think this is really good because it also helps us see the
expectations that we could have from this part of the discussion.
We heard that there is a need to clarify the guidelines for our
staff, in terms of transparency. Maybe they can’t be transparent
all the time, but can at least clarify this framework in which they
can provide information or express their views.
I’m certainly looking forward to a discussion about whether staff
is a stakeholder or not, and as Alan mentioned, a number of
probably expectations to reinforce transparency about who is
doing what, what are the responsibilities, and who people report
to as a way to enhance staff accountability, but also ICANN
accountability as a whole.
I think, with that, this closes this third lightning talk session. I’m
now turning to Leon for the next agenda item.

Page 215 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

EN

Thank you very much, Mathieu. I would like to invite to

the table Steve DelBianco. We are going to have a discussion/
presentation on ATRT 3 and Work Stream 2.
As you might be aware, there are some issues that are a matter
of discussion in the ATRT 3 and that are also in our Work Stream
2 plans. So it’s how to address this, how to avoid collision in
issues and topics, how to avoid duplicating work, and how to
avoid interfering with one group’s work and the other.
I think Steve that has prepared something for us. Are you going
to show some slides, Steve? Staff, could you please –

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

It’s already in there.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

They’re in there.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Page 216 of 262

Huh?

Okay, good. Steve, you have the floor.

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thank you. We first brought this up on May the 26th in a
document that Karen Mulberry from staff and I circulated, and
then again on the 20th of June because it only stimulated a
couple of quick replies. I realize everybody is in volunteer fatigue
mode, but this needs your attention. This is not a presentation
as much as it is an invitation to come up with a better way of
doing this, because if we don’t take action, we’re looking at an
overlap between ATRT 3, which starts in January, and six of the
nine Work Stream 2 projects, are about accountability.
As W.C. Fields once said, there’s a time in everyone’s life when
you have to grab the bull by the tail and see what’s coming. This
bull by the tail is going to dump on us if we end up with two
parallel projects for most of 2017, where we could end up with
conflicting

recommendations,

volunteer

overload,

or

sequencing, where we come up with a recommendation in Work
Stream 2 and hand it to ATRT 3 and they ignore it or go in a
completely different direction. Let’s save ourselves the trouble.
I only have two slides to try to tee this up for us. ATRT 3 is
supposed to begin in January of 2017. Six of the nine projects
have accountability and transparency in them. It wasn’t hard to
pick them out. The words “accountability” and “transparency”
were there.

Page 217 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Now, why is January [’17] so special for ATRT 3? After all, ATRT 2
– and I’m looking for Avri because she is very familiar with how
that worked – commenced in February of 2013, and the
Affirmation of Commitments (that’s the governing document
until the new Bylaws become effective), the AoC, called for an
ATRT review every three years. So it’s due any day now to get
started on third ATRT review.
Now, the Board, seeing the overload of reviews in 2016, saw it fit
several months ago to consult with NTIA and agreed that the
ATRT3 would start in January of 2017. And that’s just fine.
But meanwhile, we developed Work Stream 2, and six of our nine
projects are going to overlap. The new Bylaws that we’ve
adopted – we brought that Affirmation of Commitments into the
new Bylaws, and they require reviews no less frequently than
every five years, instead of three years.
So ATRT 2 I said convened in February of 2013. That means that
ATRT 3 could begin as late as February of 2018 instead of
January of 2017 under our new Bylaws.
Whenever I have this discussion with staff, they remind me that
the Board has a resolution, or that we have an Affirmation of
Commitments in place. But now let’s also remind ourselves that
we have a new set of Bylaws. When the new set of Bylaws are
adopted, we are recommending letting the Affirmation of

Page 218 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Commitments expire, because that’s a bilateral agreement
between one government and ICANN. By bringing all of the
Affirmations of Commitments and review into the Bylaws, we
don’t need to have the AoC. So the five-year clock cycle would
be what kicks in.
Let’s go to the second slide, Grace. It’s the second of only two
slides here. I wanted to present three options for this group to
consider. Now, this group can’t make the decision on execution,
but if we have a recommendation, my guess is that we’ll get
cooperation from the Board and staff and NTIA.
Option 1 would be to let Work Stream 2 and ATRT 3 just operate
in parallel, stretch the volunteers out, and figure out how to
reconcile conflicting recommendations when they’re done. I
don’t like that one so much, but there may be those of you in the
room who think that’s just fine.
I did hear that some folks did want ATRT 3 to begin, mainly for
the purpose of assessing whether ICANN has implemented the
recommendations that were approved out of ATRT. Therein lies
a neat idea because it’s my understanding that staff is doing
evaluations every quarter on the extent to which ATRT 2
recommendations are done, and they publish it each quarter.
Fadi mentioned that in the letter he sent to Larry Strickling.

Page 219 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Option number two is to delay the start of ATRT 3 until Work
Stream 2 finished its recommendations because, again, six of
the nine are accountability-related.
The third option is to go ahead and start ATRT 3 in January 2017
but just focus on reviewing that implementation of prior
recommendations and hold on opening the door for new
recommendations until Work Stream 2 finishes. I have a feeling
that could be the most prudent path. It would take some doing
for us to work this out and bring it to do the table.
Now, there are consideration in picking which of the three
options we want. I mentioned community volunteer fatigue. It’s
many of the same people in this room who would be on ATRT 3
and Work Stream 2. There are nine projects in Work Stream 2,
and six of them are related to accountability.
I talked about the conflicting relations, and then, finally, one of
the most important discussions is the leverage. I want you to
consider this for a minute. With the AoC reviews, as articulated
in the Bylaws, we note in Paragraph 3 in Annex 9 that ATRT
recommendations can be rejected or modified by ICANN’s Board
for purposes of feasibility, time, or cost. Neither the Affirmation
of Commitments nor the Bylaws implementation requires that
all recommendations are implemented. The Board has to give a
rationale and explain. They have to take public comment, but

Page 220 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

they don’t have to implement every recommendation that a
review team comes up with.
Within six months of report of an ATRT, the Board has to
determine whether to approve it. If they don’t approve it, the
written rationale should include – and the Board shall promptly
direct implementation of anything that [was] approved.
Now, if the community disagreed with the Board because it kept
rejecting an ATRT 3 recommendation, well, the community
could invoke an IRP and challenge that decision and get a
binding result if the Bylaws indicated that a bottom-up multistakeholder process that made a recommendation should not
be rejected by a Board.
So that’s a long way of saying that maybe, through ATRT 3, if we
came

up

with

some

really

tough

accountability

recommendations, we’d have some degree of leverage with the
Board.
But now I ask you to compare that with Work Stream 2’s
implementation in the new Bylaws. This is Work Stream 2 as a
special set of Bylaws that we wrote about how to implement the
recommendations that CCWG comes up with.
It

says,

“The

recommendations

Page 221 of 262

Board
from

shall
CCWG

consider
on

consensus-based
Work

Stream

2

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

recommendations with the same process and criteria that the
Board committed to use for the CCWG’s final report on Work
Stream 1.” That’s good.
The Bylaw also says that, if the Board determines by a two-thirds
vote that it’s not in the global public interest to implement a
Work Stream 2 recommendation, it has to initiate a dialogue
with us, the CCWG. The Board has to provide a detailed
rationale, and then we are supposed to mutually agree with the
Board upon a method to work this out and find a mutually
acceptable solution.
Then we would have an opportunity to report back to the Board
with a revised recommendation. If, after this process, the Board
still believes it’s not in the public interest by a two-thirds vote,
they can send it back with rationale. If they decide not to
implement on the second time with the two-thirds vote, the
Board is not allowed to substitute its own accountability
improvement, unless and until the CCWG reaches an agreement.
So in no case does CCWG or the community force something
through without Board approval. But the CCWG Work Stream 2
has

significantly

implementation

greater
and

approval

accountability improvements.

Page 222 of 262

leverage
of

at

achieving

particularly

the
tough

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

I wanted to save this presentation until after the lighting talks
because several of these lighting talks have brought up the
notion of some, well, pretty dramatic transparency and
accountability ideas; that if we work through Work Stream 2,
we’re going to want the extra leverage of having Work Stream 2,
rather than relying on ATRT 3 to make it happen.
With that, Leon, I’ll put it back to you in the hope that would try
to get to a decision on this. We’ve talked about this for about six
weeks without much movement, but I’m trying to make it seem
urgent because, if we as the CCWG were of one mind on this, we
would work with staff and the Board to begin to rearrange things
on ATRT 3.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Steve. Just to be clear, we have

three options on the table, the first one being Work Stream 2 and
ATRT 3 operating in parallel with the risks that Steve has
highlighted in his presentation. Delaying the start of ATRT 3 until
Work Stream 2 finishes is the second option. The third would be
to begin the ATRT 3 as scheduled in January 2017 but focusing
on reviewing implementation of ATRT 2 recommendations so
that the group looking into ATRT 3 could wait until Work Stream
2 finishes its recommendations, and then continue to move
forward with ATRT 3.

Page 223 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Now the floor is open for comments and questions. The first in
the queue is Anne Aikman. Anne, you have the floor.

ANNE AIKMAN-SCALESE:

I apologize. It’s an old hand. But I do want to point out that
Samantha has posted a link in the chat for those interested in
doing further work on apparently a strategy group on the
definition of the global public interest. Samantha’s link leads to
a sign-up for that purpose.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

AVRI DORIA:

Thanks, Anne. Next is Avri.

Thanks. I may have been one person that did comment on this
before. I’ll start out by saying I was very upset that we delayed
and didn’t do ATRT 3 already, before getting to the point of
having the WS 2 start. In other words, if we were going to do a
level setting and a “Let’s check where we are. Let’s check how
accountable we’ve been to the previous recommendations,”
which I’d say was probably middling, and making other
recommendations, that would have been the time to do it.

Page 224 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

I agree that trying to do it simultaneously with WS 2 is probably
an insane thing to try. I think that the only reasonable option
that’s up there is the middle one.
I don’t think that we should denature ATRT into being something
that just reviews but does not recommend, so therefore I don’t
think the third one is practical. I think that the first one, as
people say, would be confusing if nothing else.
So I really think that the second one at this point is the best
option. But I reiterate: I think we make a mistake, and I think I
said so at that time, too, in not having done it already and not
going into WS 2 with both an analysis of where we were and
recommendations that were specific to issues at the moment.
Thanks.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Avri. Steve, do you want to

comment on that?

STEVE DELBIANCO:

If I could. Avri, thank you. Number three doesn’t say that ATRT 3
doesn’t get to make recommendations. It says that ATRT 3
doesn’t begin work on its recommendations until Work Stream 2
is finished, but that, if ATRT 3 could convene earlier, it could put

Page 225 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

a sharp eye on the question of: were the last set of
recommendations implemented or not?
That may not be satisfactory to the members of the ATRT 3, in
which case it might be sufficient to rely on these staff reports
that come out each quarter and begin to focus attention on
them. We can do that without waiting for ATRT 3 to convene.
So the differences between 2 and 3 are matters of degree
because that all depends on whether we want to put a sharp eye
on implementation. What would your view on that be?

AVRI DORIA:

Well, first of all, then you’re talking about taking an ATRT and
extending it for several years as opposed to it being something
that gets done in a year, which is still the optimal idea. So I really
don’t think it’s practical.
As I say, it’s a pity that we didn’t do it already. But to try to do an
evaluation in one place while we’re trying to make changes in
another place just does not make any sense to me at this point.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

And I’d like to be deferential to your experience. You’ve been on
both ATRTs.

Page 226 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

AVRI DORIA:

Only the second.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Only the second one. But if your experience indicates that it’s
more practical to just delay all of ATRT 3 until we finish Work
Stream 2 accountability items – and it wouldn’t be until we
finish all of Work Stream 2, but at least until we finish the six
accountability and transparency segments of Work Stream 2,
because there are three others that are unrelated to that.
But I would concur with your recommendation with either 2 or 3.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you very much, Steve. Next in the queue I have

Roelof.

ROELOF MEIJER:

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Is it too late to come up with an
Option 4?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible]

ROELOF MEIJER:

It’s not? Okay. How about if we leave everything that is – how did
we say that – also probably going to be covered by the ATRT 3 to

Page 227 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

the ATRT 3 and we just focus in Work Stream 2 on those things
that are not going to be dealt with ATRT 3? I think then, in the
end, we could cover the program of your third consideration,
Steve, by just endorsing, as CCWG, those recommendations of
ATRT 3 that we agree with, because I think then they will still
have the power of the CCWG over them.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Roelof, that’s a very creative idea. The notion is: let Work Stream
2 pause on all six of those accountability/transparency items.
The people who are interested in those should go jump into the
ATRT and get on that team, then, like Ed Morris wants to work on
transparency in DIDP. So rather than park that, Ed goes to work
on the ATRT 3 team. When they finish, to get the leverage of the
Bylaws implementation, you say, “Have the CCWG embrace
those recommendations coming out of the ATRT 3 so they get
implemented with greater leverage.” That’s a great idea.

ROELOF MEIJER:

It’s great. My starting point is that, as a group, we’re not looking
for more work that is absolutely necessary.

Page 228 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

STEVE DELBIANCO:

EN

Thomas just asked, “But what if they contradict?” I think that
Roelof’s point is that in Work Stream 2 six of our nine projects
wouldn’t even start. That’s what Roelof’s point is.

ROELOF MEIJER:

To be more precise, if ATRT 3 comes up with ideas that our
group doesn’t agree with. That’s what I meant by “conflict.”

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Okay. Then our group didn’t agree with – well, if that were the
case, we could create conflicts, or the ATRT3 recommendations
would have somewhat lower leverage at getting the Board to
adopt them. But it would not be pleasant to have disagreement
on what it is, particularly when it’s roughly the same individuals.
Most of you who are in this room who would work on ATRT3 –

ROELOF MEIJER:

Thomas, I think for that particular case we will have the
Empowered Community. So if ATRT comes up with the
recommendation that the CCWG doesn’t agree with, I don’t think
we should have the power to stop – as a working group, we
should have the power to stop that recommendation.
Of course we will not endorse it, but it will be up to the
Empowered Community, if the Board wants to implement that

Page 229 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

recommendation, to stop the Board from doing so. That should
not be the CCWG, in my opinion.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Roelof, is there a risk that the ATRT 3 may not pick all six of our
accountability areas? If you go back one slide, Grace, to the
previous slide. Previous slide, please. Thank you.
Roelof, these six items at the bottom of the page are now in the
ICANN Bylaws as Work Stream 2, so we’d have to have some
assurance that the scope of ATRT 3 would cover them all.

ROELOF MEIJER:

Well, the risk that you run, I think, is that, if they don’t, we will
conclude that after the work of the ATRT 3 has finished, and that
would still mean that we would have to do work on it.
In my opinion, running parallel processes is not a good idea.
Also, in my opinion, postponing ATRT 3 even more is also not a
good idea.
Now we can divide the work bit, and in the end, the CCWG still
can decide what it wants – if it wants to endorse the
recommendations that are aligned with the work that we have
to do, if they don’t want to endorse them, or if they want to
continue work after the ATRT has finished.

Page 230 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

But it would probably mean less work for us now, so we can
make more progress at the same time.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thanks, Roelof. I guess this is going to be – yeah, a longer

discussion. But it’s useful to have these [inaudible] around the
table.
Next in the queue I have Alan Greenberg.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you very much. I will comment on that suggestion, but
first I have a question. In Option 2, which is no longer there,
makes a presumption that Work Stream 2 finishes by February
2018. Some of us have dear hopes that it will finish well before
then, but Option 2 presumes it must finish or we’re in violation
of the Bylaws, as we have discussed ad infinitum with regard to
the WHOIS review. So I wouldn’t make any presumptions on
that.
With regard mandating that ATRT 2/ATRT 3 take up the work
that we want them to do, we have very carefully crafted the
Bylaws to say we’re giving them discretion as to what they want
to pick and what they want to sit on. They have a huge job in
reviewing the past work to begin with. Our target normally has
been to do it within one year.

Page 231 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

As you, Steve, are well-aware, I personally think that the size of
new reviews that we’ve mandated is somewhat bloated, that the
size we’re specifying is about twice the size of any previous one.
Let me finish. But even with that size, it’s an awful lot of work,
given that you know some percentage of the people never quite
pull their full weight. So I don’t think that deferring to the ATRT
to do the work is a viable option for many reasons. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thanks, Alan. Steve, do you [inaudible]?

No.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Okay. I’m closing the queue with Pedro, and next is

Jonathan Zuck.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thanks, Leon. I guess, as a kind of corollary to Avri, I would
mourn the fact that Work Stream 2 exists, frankly, because I
think it was just born out of paranoia about Work Stream 1.
What we hope is to have an ongoing process of continuous
reform that would be reflected through the review processes
that we have in place.

Page 232 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

So I think the really unfortunate thing is that there is a Work
Stream 2, frankly, and that that’s what has created this crazy
conflict that’s taking place.
I guess, jumping off from what Keith Drazek said in the chat, I’m
almost inclined to find some way to call Work Stream 2 ATRT 3
and put ATRT 3 far enough off that it can review the
implementation of the recommendations we’re putting in place.
Having all of these crazy recommendations coming right on top
of each other I think is the height of ridiculousness for an
organization that’s had so much trouble with implementation
historically. So as far as an alternative, I would skip ATRT 3 in
some way. I know it’s in the Bylaws, but I believe that everything
has a solution. We have some lawyers at our beck and call to find
that solution.
As Steve suggests, maybe there’s some subset type of activity
that has to do with implementation of ATRT 2 recommendations
that some track – maybe that’s a Work Stream 2 track or
something like that. But I think talking about these things in
concert is in and of itself a mistake.
But if everyone feels like we’re forced to do that, then some
variant on Roelof’s suggestion is the right one. I’m facing it right
now, starting the CCT review at the same time that the PDP for

Page 233 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

subsequent procedures is taking place. The irony of that is that
the first half of the PDP’s efforts will be to conduct a review.
So instead of one feeding the other, they’re happening in
parallel. What we did in that case was the Review Team chose
some subset of issues and reported those issues back to the PDP
to limit their activities or at least postpone their activities. I think
that addresses the one limitation on Roelof’s suggestion: if we
got guidance from the ATRT in terms of what topics they were
going to take up, those could be the ones that we postponed.
But I think all those solutions are hateful, and the real issue is
actually, I think, to skip ATRT 3.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

Thanks, Jonathan. Okay. Next in the queue I have Siva.

This is on Option 2: Delaying the start of the ATRT 3 until Work
Stream 2 finishes its recommendation. Now, my first question is,
does the CCWG have the mandate to determine when the ATRT 3
should start or should not start?
The next point is, if it does have the mandate, or even otherwise
if ATRT 3 starts the day after Work Stream 2 finishes its
recommendations, what if ATRT 3 disagrees with some of Work

Page 234 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Stream 2’s recommendations and wants to take a re-look at
three or four of the [topics’] recommendations and comes up
with contrary recommendations?
Another solution would be to look at how different ATRT 3 and
CCWG is. CCWG is more open. It’s more participatory. It’s open
for participation from everyone, whereas the ATRT 3 is
constituted with a fixed number of members.
So I don’t see any harm in both processes going forward
simultaneously. This one is visualized as a continuous process to
look at accountability improvements on a continual basis with a
certain mandate with wider participation. So it could come up
with its own recommendations, which could in all probability be
accepted by ATRT 3 and incorporated by ATRT 3 as a limited
group, a group with a limited number of members who often
deliberate in retreats and closed meetings. They’re only for
deliberation. So it’s probably – ATRT 3 is constituted by the
Board, and let it also go on.
So there are several options. It’s not a clear-cut solution. I’m just
laying all these three points. Thank you.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Just to briefly respond, Siva, there’s no mandate for us, and of
course there doesn’t need to be. The Board had a mandate

Page 235 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

called the Affirmation of Commitments, and it negotiated with
the other party to the affirmation, the U.S. government, and
said, “Let’s set it up for January of 2017.” That was a little later
than many community members wanted and somewhat later
than it was called for under the affirmation.
If we come up with a strongly supported CCWG consensus on the
right way to sequence these things, we would make that
recommendation. We’re in a very cooperative mode with the
Board right now, so you don’t need a mandate if you have a
good idea.
At the end of your statement, you said you wanted to do them
both simultaneously, and I wrote that down. And then you
finished by saying that the Work Stream 2 recommendations
would then probably be accepted by ATRT 3. But that’s
sequential. That’s not simultaneous then.
So you’re right back to: delay the start of ATRT 3 until they finish.
You ended your statement on the second bullet, not on
simultaneous.

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

Okay. Maybe the end was not very clearly worded. I was
[inaudible] came to the floor. What I meant is that the

Page 236 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

recommendations of one group could be accepted by the other.
So [inaudible] –

STEVE DELBIANCO:

But that’s sequential.

SIVA MUTHUSAMY:

No, but this one is to go on as a continuous process, so it’s not –

STEVE DELBIANCO:

It is continuous, but it’s every five years. It’s not every day of
every year. It’s once every five years. That’s still continuous,
mind you, but it’s not something that’s ongoing.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thank you, Steve, and thank you, Siva. Next in the queue

I have Bruce Tonkin.

BRUCE TONKIN:

Thank you, Leon. Just picking up on Steve’s comment,
procedurally I think what could happen if this group decided
that it didn’t think that we should start the ATRT 3, as you say
Steve, the proposal would come to the Board, and then the
Board would discuss with you as government a change in that
provision. We have a current agreement with the U.S.

Page 237 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

government, the Affirmation of Commitments. So both parties
could obviously say, based on the community’s wishes, “We
want to change that agreement.”
So, yes, I agree. It’s an option. But from the Board perspective,
we’d want to get the U.S. government to approve that before we
would go ahead with that. So it’s just a straight procedural
expectation, if you like.
Getting back into the substance of the options, I lean a little bit
more towards that third option, partly because I think what’s
most useful for these review teams to focus on is the
effectiveness of the changes that have been made since the last
review, which I think can be quite narrowly scoped. You can
basically say, “Here’s the changes that were made. Were they
effective?”
And I don’t think it should be a year-exercise. I think it should be
a 60-day-exercise. I think we’ve got to get these review teams
down to something more manageable. In an engineering-project
sense, you don’t spend two years reviewing a project that take
you a year. We should be able to do these reviews fast: “This is
the changes. This is the data. Was it effective? Let’s move on.”
While that’s happening in parallel, what I think your Work
Stream 2 groups could be doing is actually looking at best

Page 238 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

practices in other environment. They’re two very different
things.
One is: the changes that were made – did they work or did they
not? That can be the focus of the ATRT team. In parallel, while
that work is happening, if you picked a topic like transparency,
what are some of the best practices in other organizations that
we might want to bring into ICANN? What are some of the
mechanisms we might want to use for accountability?
You can actually start surveying practices, getting input from
outside of the ICANN environment. That’s why we want to bring
in external advisors to some degree: to get new ideas, fresh
ideas. Let’s look at those fresh ideas. You could be looking at
that in parallel with the ATRT 2. Then, when you start choosing
recommendations, you would have the output of the ATRT 3 and
the output of the initial work that you’ve done, and then you can
move into recommendation mode.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thanks, Bruce. There seems to be a problem with

Kavouss in the AC room. He was supposed to speak after Siva,
but then something happened. So, Kavouss, if you may.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Page 239 of 262

No problem. You put me at the end.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

EN

Okay.

If you [keep] me, no problem. Thank you.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Okay. Thank you very much. Next in the queue would be

Jan Aart. Jan?

JAN AART SCHOLTE:

Thanks. I just see that there are rearrangements being proposed
here. I’m just remembering that the Work Stream 1 package was
agreed on the understanding that there was going to be a Work
Stream 2, and that that Work Stream 2 would finish within a year
after the completion of Work Stream 1.
A lot of this would change that. There’s also a question of what
would happen with those issues that are in Work Stream 2 but
not on ATRT 3, like diversity, for example. I think a number of
people might be worried that these kinds of changes would
result in such issues getting lost, which is I think why they were
included in Work Stream 2 in the first place.

Page 240 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

STEVE DELBIANCO:

EN

And that would argue for – you would take any of the three
options. You probably wouldn’t be as inclined with Roelof’s
option, since it might ignore a Work Stream 2 item for as much
as a year-and-a-half to two years.

JAN AART SCHOLTE:

I see the attractions in what he’s saying, but unintentionally I
think it does go against the spirit of what Work Stream 2 was
created to do.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Thanks, Jan. Thanks, Steve. Next in the queue I have

Fiona.

FIONA ASONGA:

Thank you. I think, based on my experience working in ATRT 2,
many do not understand the challenge that there is in the ATRT
2 reviews because every ATRT 2 review has to review all other
reviews that have taken place since the previous ATRT 2 review.
During ATRT 2, the SSR review had just completed, and ICANN
had not yet even begun going into implementing their
recommendations of the SSR review. So ATRT 3 has got a
responsibility, when looking at the SSR reviews, going back to
the last implemented recommendations of the SSR review

Page 241 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

process, which is going to the previous SSR review before ATRT
2, and then come into the reviews that have been done between
after

ATRT

2,

looking

at

implementation

of

the

recommendations and the challenges therein.
Then we want to add in all the Work Stream 2 issues related to
transparency and accountability. I think it’s going to be an
overkill on the ATRT scope of work because they’ll all be having
all the three other SO recommended reviews being reviewed
now as part of the Bylaws – the Consumer Trust, SSR, and WHOIs
reviews.
Then they also have to look at the ATRT reviews and the
recommendations. Even if the team is big, it’s much more
difficult to make decisions with a large group. We did
recommend for the group to be almost double what it was
before, which means then that there’s going to be challenges
within ATRT 3 to even achieve the targets because of the large
group , the [blotting] of the group. There is no guarantee that
those who volunteer will be able to work on the review
processes and the Work Stream 2.
So it’s important that the two are kept separate. As the CCWG,
we have control of our timeframe. We can review our timeframe
and make an effort to try to close on issues in good time and
give a – at least by the time ATRT 3 is starting, if we have our

Page 242 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

draft recommendations already having been receiving public
comment and public review, it will help significantly in enabling
ATRT 3 in beginning on the work that they need to begin, even
within the timeframe we have.
But I think that the onus is on us. We’re sitting here to decide:
are we going to shorten the timeframe, or are we going to
prolong it? Because that is within our scope to do, but we have
to do them sequentially. I wouldn’t recommend doing them at
the same time, partly because of the confusion it will also create
in the community as we seek public input and feedback on
issues. For the purposes of clarity, it would be good to have it as
a sequence. Thanks.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Fiona, one quick reaction. So you’re favoring Options 2 or 3 but
not 1. I get that. But a year ago we identified that the AoC
required

the

ATRT

Review

Team

to

review

all

the

implementation of all the other reviews, and we concluded that
was crazy.
So the new Bylaws are different. The new Bylaws require each
team

to

review

the

implementation

of

its

previous

recommendations. The ATRT no longer has to look at all the
others, so that’s all gone in the Bylaws that the Board approved.

Page 243 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

They’re just not effective yet. Once the new Bylaws are effective,
that problem that you just explained disappears. Okay?
Now, the ATRT 3 that we’re discussing today, the one that’s
supposed to start in January 2017, yes, it’s under the terms of
the Affirmation of Commitments – the old rules – because the
new rules haven’t been adopted officially in effect. They were
approved by the Board, but they’re not in effect until we do the
IANA transition.
So some of what you’re saying is going to be solved, but I
appreciate you giving us your perspective of: Don’t do them in
parallel. Thank you.

FIONA ASONGA:

Just to respond to that, that’s the reason. Because they’ve not
yet been effective is the reasoning I’m explaining the whole thing
again.
However, we need to focus on making sure that, even when the
new Bylaws become effective, we still cannot throw in the Work
Stream 2 issues into ATRT review. They have to run separately,
one then the other. That’s really the point I’m trying to make.

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

Page 244 of 262

Thanks, Fiona. Next in the queue? Kavouss.

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

KAVOUSS ARESTAH:

EN

Thank you. I think there are clear conflicts between ATRT 3 and
Work Stream 2. Sometimes there’s a full-scale conflict – SO/AC
accountability. Sometimes it’s some degree of conflict between
transparency – they call it transparency improvement –
jurisdiction – they called it jurisdiction – they called it
jurisdiction related to accountability – and Ombudsman – they
called it Ombudsman improvement. So there is a conflict. We
have to avoid the conflict.
The most clear-cut way is Option 2. However, if there is an
urgency for the ATRT 3 to start and concentrate only on
recommendations of the ATRT 2, still we should ensure that
there should be no conflict between those recommendations
and ATRT 2. So we have to take the most secure actions.
Community are the same community. We have to be very careful
of the consideration, given the first [inaudible] community
[volunteer]. It’s a very important element, and also an element
mentioned by Steve was that Work Stream 2 is more open, more
participatory. So let’s just take that one. People are talking of
transparency, so there is a transparency, so we have to be
consistent. Perhaps clear-cut would be Option 2. Thank you.

Page 245 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

EN

Thank you very much, Kavouss. [inaudible], who speaks

about [inaudible]?

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

[inaudible]

LEON SANCHEZ:

What does that mean? Okay, so are there any other questions or
comments on this topic?
I see a hand at the back.

KATHY KLEIMAN:

I apologize. I’m not in the Adobe Connect. Kathy Kleiman with
the Non-Commercial Stakeholders Group. I’m coming from
actually the working group side. You’re talking about doing
things in parallel. We’re talking about review teams going on in
parallel. We’ve already got more working groups taking place in
the GNSO policy development process working groups, big ones,
three taking place in parallel. We don’t have enough volunteers
for all this, guys. There’s just not enough people in our
community to staff all of this in parallel. We are looking at
burnout.
You’re also being unfair to those of us who have children.

Page 246 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

LEON FELIPE SANCHEZ AMBIA:

EN

Thank you very much, Kathy. Okay. I see that Thomas

Rickert is in the queue. Thomas?

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Leon. All very good points. I think that we are
maneuvering towards a solution. What I’m hearing from
different individuals is that we don’t have enough volunteers at
our fingertips to do everything [inaudible]. We hear that – and
I’m paraphrasing here – we might as an ICANN community look
extremely foolish if we have two competing processes running in
parallel that might come up with contradicting resolutions or
proposals.
Then let’s just assume the Board adopts one of the
recommendations and we have to challenge that with the new
mechanisms. We are an IRP. We would make fools out of
ourselves on the global stage. So that begs, I think, for
sequential handling of these things.
I think Kavouss made an excellent point, that Work Stream 2
potentially has more resources than ATRT would. So I would
suggest that our group comes up with a recommendation to the
Board and the chartering organizations to pause ATRT 3 until
such time when Work Stream 2 has its recommendations ready
so that at least we would have a clear vision on how things could
work.

Page 247 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

I would like to ask whether there’s any violent opposition to
making such a proposal. I see that Jonathan is getting frustrated
with me. Hopefully, I’m misinterpreting that. But I would also
like to probably get the attention of the Board members in the
room. I’m particularly looking at Bruce, who’s our Board liaison,
for what his thoughts on this approach would be.
I’m not trying to capture this from Leon, but we might want to
hear Jonathan and then probably Bruce’s instant reaction,
which we can recap from you.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

It feels like an arbitrary effort to make sure that we check a
bunch of boxes, and the practical effect of starting an ATRT
review right on the heels of a bunch of recommendations
coming out of the CCWG Work Stream 2 I think is just going to be
crazy on the face.
At best, what we’ll end up with is defining the ATRT review in a
more streamlined fashion, in the way that Bruce has
recommended. If that is in fact the objective, then there’s no
reason to wait.
But if we’re trying to do a full-blown ATRT review right on the
heels of a whole bunch of recommendations around

Page 248 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

accountability and transparency, I think as a practical matter it’s
just going to be ridiculous.
So I think, if we’re going to move forward with something that
we call the ATRT 3, it should be the modified version, some
variation on what Bruce and what Steve suggested as an
implementation review or however we want to phrase it. Then
there’s no need to wait, except maybe because of volunteer
fatigue or something, but it’s a subset of people.
But I think just doing a regular ATRT 3 right on the heels of this
would be ridiculous.

THOMAS RICKERT:

I think this is multi-layered. The suggestion that I was making
was: who picks up the work? At least that’s what I’m sensing in
the room: a lot of folks would like Work Stream 2 to work on
these matters that would be partially or in total picked up by
ATRT 3.
I think it is yet a different discussion for how you scope ATRT 3.
So I think that needs to have more discussion, and that
discussion is probably not appropriate for us to have. But I think
we as a group, if you all agree, or at least if we have rough
consensus on that, should go to the Board and the chartering
organizations and suggest that we do the heavy lifting on these

Page 249 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

topics within the framework of what we’ve basically promised to
the global community; i.e., that we would work on these topics
in Work Stream 2 and then have a separate discussion to ensure
that we’re not doing something that is a moot exercise,
basically; i.e., have an ATRT full-blown on brand-new policies or
brand-new recommendations.

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Thomas, if I could. It’s the third bullet. I think what Jonathan
said is that, on the third bullet just strike the last five words. In
other words, go ahead and begin ATRT 3, but only to review
implementation of prior. And then they’re done. That’s what
Bruce Tonkin said was a 60-day project. And not wait around for
us to finish WS 2, only to duplicate that effort, too.
So I think that you’re basically skipping the recommendations
part, the new recommendations part of ATRT 3. Then, five years
later, a new ATRT 4 will be born, and it will look back over five
years on how well all this stuff worked out.
So it’s really not skipping ATRT 3. It’s just saying that ATRT 3 will
have a very narrow scope of reviewing the implementation of
prior recommendations, and then they can go home. Well,
actually they don’t go home. They move over and work on Work
Stream 2 because we’re going to need the help.

Page 250 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Or they make recommendations specific to reimplementation,
modified

implementation,

or

in

synergy

with

the

recommendations that are coming out of Work Stream 2. Look
at them and say, “Oh, that looks like it’s addressing the
implantation issue somehow that came up.” It doesn’t have to
be recommendation-free, necessarily.

THOMAS RICKERT:

We then only have a slight timing issue, probably, because, if
that starts in January 2017, according to the plan that we have
presented to you – I think it was on Slide 5 of this slide deck;
maybe we can move to that – we would be ready in February
with the easy tasks, and mid-year ’17 with the more challenging
tasks, if we can stick to that agenda. But –

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible].

THOMAS RICKERT:

This one. Exactly. Let’s hear Bruce now. Bruce?

BRUCE TONKIN:

Just a really quick variable. That January ’17 I think is “by
January ’17.” Presumably you could bring that forward a quarter

Page 251 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

if it’d help this work. You could actually start it in October with
quite a simple [remit], which is that 60 days [inaudible]. But
basically think about it as a quarter. If we started that round
about the time of the meeting in Hyderabad or slightly before –
and it has a very simple mandate – just tell us, was it effective or
not? – and as Jonathan said, certainly they could identify some
tweaks to those recommendations, but you wouldn’t even be
expecting that group to conduct a major piece of work in
something completely new, because that’s what Work Stream 2
is doing.

THOMAS RICKERT:

I guess that’s an excellent idea. Since we would usually have
finished in two minutes’ time, what I suggest doing is we come
up with a draft correspondence to the Board and the chartering
organizations based on this discussion; i.e., we will go first with
what we have promised in our Work Stream 1 report.
We will suggest that we do the heavy lifting on these things and
that it’s up to the Board to kick off ATRT 3 earlier. Or at least they
would strip out the redundant work, right?
So no final decision made on that now, but we take that as
direction from the group to draft something along these lines,
which we’re going to send to the list in the next couple of days.

Page 252 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Okay. I see nodding somewhere. Avri doesn’t like it. We would
love to make everyone happy, but maybe we can make sure that
we smooth things out a little bit more on the list.
I see Kavouss’ hand is up, and then we would really like to move
forward. Kavouss, and then Avri.

KAVOUSS ARESTAH:

Fully I agree with you, provided that we clearly explain to the
Board the situations. They could take the responsibility if they
do differently. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Avri, please?

AVRI DORIA:

What you’re proposing is not an ATRT review. It is not one under
the AoC. It is not one under your new Bylaws. It’s some new
fantasy we’re creating to say, “Let’s do a review of where we’re
at,” which is a fine thing to do. But don’t pretend that it’s an
ATRT. It isn’t.

THOMAS RICKERT:

I don’t disagree, Avri, just to be perfectly clear. But I think we
have to make sure that we make the best out of the situation

Page 253 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

and that we avoid that we do double work and end up conflicts
that wouldn’t serve the community well.
I think we can’t go any further. I think the arguments have been
exchanged. Thanks so much, Steve, for helping us with this
discussion.
I promise to make this very brief. This last agenda item that was
put into the agenda for 30 minutes will not last 30 minutes, but I
think, nonetheless, we need to get some guidance from you as a
group as to how we move on.
We heard a couple of lightning talks. All of them have been
summarized to you, so I won’t take stock on that again because
that would be redundant work. But what we see is that there’s
obviously a different level of interest in the different items that
we have on our list for Work Stream 2. We didn’t manage to
successfully get lightning talks for all topics in Work Stream 2.
I’m going to read out to you what the number of volunteers is
that have subscribed to the different topics. For diversity, we
have 31; human rights, 38; jurisdiction, 42, which is actually the
leading topic in terms of participation; Ombudsman, 21; SO/AC
accountability, 25; staff accountability, 22; transparency, 24;
CEP, 9; guidelines for standards of Board behavior, 9.

Page 254 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

So that is telling, not in terms of importance, but in terms of
what resources you are able at this point in time to put into
these topics. That begs the question of whether it’s realistic that
we kick off all these topics now as proposed in this timetable, or
whether we probably want to start some of them a little bit later.
That’s food for thought. I think we can’t resolve it today, but
please do think about it. Maybe you’ll also say, “I’m brave
enough to join a group that doesn’t enjoy that much
participation at the moment so that we can get it all pulled off,”
which would obviously be the favorite option in terms of timing.
But the question is whether it’s feasible. If it’s not feasible, do
you guys think that we should focus on the complex things now
and start the others a little bit later? I guess that would be useful
guidance from the group, from you as a community, so that we
can plan in an accountable fashion.
The other question that we wanted to discuss but we’re actually
going to discuss it on the next call or on the list is sub-team
leadership or rapporteurs for the sub-teams.
We have different ways to approach this. We could vote in folks
that are rapporteurs. We could appoint people. What’s your
preference on this? Do you want to give it a little bit more
thought and maybe come up with proposals [on] the procedure?

Page 255 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

You can also privately send us e-mails if you would like to
volunteer to lead on a sub-topic or a topic of a sub-team.
I see that there are hands raised from Sebastien, and then I saw
that Kavouss wanted to speak, and Steve. Let’s move to
Sebastien first.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Thank you very much. Just a question. How many people are in
multiple groups? Because I think, when you say 42 or 36, if they
are doing everything in parallel, that means that those people
need to have three times, or four times, or five times more than
people in the one single group. I think it’s an important element
to decide how we’ll launch all those groups. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Sebastien, I don’t have that breakdown available, but we can
work on it. That’s helpful advice. Maybe we should take this as
an action item for everyone. If you have signed up – and many,
many of you have – do only subscribe to the sub-teams that you
can actually put work into as participants if you can spend the
time. If you can’t spend the time, if you just want to read, change
to observer status. I think if everyone does that then we can
more easily understand how many people are actually willing to
put efforts in that.

Page 256 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Maybe that’s the way forward, Sebastien?

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

May I suggest that you ask another thing: to put priority? Say
your name. This one is for one, and the other one second. And
this is the third one. So it could be one way also to see what the
priority is of each person. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Sebastien. We will take that into account
when we send that reminder to the volunteer base. We have
Kavouss and then Steve. Sorry.

KAVOUSS ARESTAH:

Thank you, Thomas. If you want to go to the vote for the
leadership of the group, I suggest that we don’t do that. Calls for
volunteers? If for any group you have more than one, then we try
to ask those [two] people interested to get together to see which
one would be more comfortable to take the leadership. I think it
is a tedious job, and we should welcome the people that are
coming through, and we should not go to the voting.
Everything in the work is [inaudible] based on all of us in
consensus. Let’s continue these standards and not go to the
voting. It doesn’t help at all. For what? Is it a big workload for the

Page 257 of 262

EN

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

person who comes? Let’s just thank them and congratulate
them and welcome them and take [inaudible], unless there are
two people. Then we can put them together with each other and
come up with one of them. That’s all. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Kavouss. I wasn’t suggesting that we should
vote, but I wanted to put different options in front of the group.
But that’s helpful. Steve?

STEVE DELBIANCO:

I think that, in Work Stream 2, our default should be to behave
as we did in Work Stream 1. The Bylaws that we’ve written for
Work Stream 2 say that the Board will behave in Work Stream 2,
just the way they did in Work Stream 1.
You’ve said earlier we’d go with the same working methods that
we’ve

used

before:

staff

support,

transcription,

open

participation. So if we’re going to have continuity from Work
Stream 1 to 2, then let’s do the rapporteurs the same way. Let
that be the default assumption.
So as opposed to asking this room, “How would you like to
select rapporteurs?” let’s make it that we propose to do it
exactly the same way you did in Work Stream 1. You asked for

Page 258 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

volunteers, and the co-Chairs appointed somebody from among
the volunteers.
In a couple of cases, we had two rapporteurs. Cheryl and I both
did the rapporteur on Stress Test because we had two
volunteers. It was a stressful situation.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Stress.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Can you elaborate?

STEVE DELBIANCO:

Yeah. So I’m just saying to go by default the way we did it before,
and only deviate if someone in this room makes a compelling
argument that they have a better way.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Steve. Niels?

NIELS:

Thank you, Thomas. I think we could maybe not need to get to a
vote if people can make publically known, possibly in the sheets,
where they would be willing to be a coordinator or a rapporteur,
and then we see how many people would be willing to take up

Page 259 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

such a role and position. Then it might turn out that not that
many people have that time commitment to do that. That would
then help us, and we have a self-selecting mechanism.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Thanks very much, Niels. That’s helpful. You wanted to speak,
Cheryl? You get the last word for today.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Wow. Thank you.

THOMAS RICKERT:

Well, except for me.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

I was going to say this is unlikely. You’re going to wrap up, I’m
sure. Just on that, Niels, I think when people are volunteering,
you should think that just on meeting time alone it’s about three
times what you do for the ordinary committee of the whole.
So if you’re stepping up to be a rapporteur, you need to commit
to about three times the meeting time to work with the
leadership team in preparatory and post and drafting. Just keep
that in mind, so when you make a commitment, you make it
informed.

Page 260 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

THOMAS RICKERT:

EN

Thanks very much, Cheryl. Now, we will send information on
that to the list.
That allows me to conclude the meeting now. But before we
adjourn, I would like to thank you all for a very fruitful
discussion. I think we’ve learned a lot about the different topics
ahead of us. For some topics, I think we learned that we need to
shape our scope and the way we approach things more. Maybe
that has already worked for the sub-teams. For other areas, I
think we’re much clearer now on a way forward and how to
address the issues.
But there’s a lot of work to be done. Look back on what we’ve
achieved. I think we shouldn’t be that afraid of the work to
come. I think that’s the Herculean task part of that whole work
we’ve already delivered.
I would like to thank our staff, and I think they deserve a round
of applause. I would like to particularly point out the tech folks.
You will have noticed that we had some issues at the beginning,
and they fixed in. So, a marvelous job. Thanks for that.
Thanks to the remote participants, who’ve been patient in the
Adobe Room. It’s very hard to follow a whole day of discussion
remotely, so a big kudos to you guys.

Page 261 of 262

HELSINKI – CCWG Accountability WS2 Session

EN

Thanks to all of you, and thanks to my lovely co-Chairs. Let’s
adjourn now. Thank you so much.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Hi. Everyone, hi. Sorry. For those of you who need a shuttle,
there’s a shuttle leaving at 5:15. We’re going to try to make it
5:30 just to give you guys enough time to get there. There’s a
shuttle heading back to the Scandic Marski, I believe. So for
those of you who need a shuttle, it’s there.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 262 of 262

