Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures
ICANN56 | Tuesday, 28 June 2016 from 1700-1830

Agenda

1

2

3

Introductions

Status update on the
PDP Working Group

Discussion: Topics of
Broad Community
Interest

Here’s a place to
introduce your fifth
agenda item from
your talk.

Here’s a place to
introduce your sixth
agenda item from
your talk.

4
Next Steps

| 2

Introductions

Status update on the PDP Working
Group

Timeline: Path to the Current PDP on New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

1 Jun
2015

24 Jun
2015

31 Aug
2015

17 Dec
2015

21 Jan
2016

22 Feb
2016

GNSO
Discussion
Group submits
report to
GNSO Council

GNSO Council
requests
Preliminary
Issue Report

Preliminary
Issue Report
published for
public
comment

GNSO Council
initiates PDP

GNSO Council
approves
Charter for the
Working
Group

Working
Group starts
weekly
meetings

Notes:
• Discussion Group (DG) developed an Issue Matrix (based on experiences from the 2012 New gTLD Program
round) and mapped the issues to the original 2007 GNSO Policy Principles, Recommendations & Implementation
Guidance
• DG also developed a draft Charter with suggested groupings for the issues, with potential questions for each issue
– intended as starting point for the eventual PDP and basis of the Staff Issue Report

| 5

What is the Purpose of the New gtLD Subsequent Procedures PDP?
¤

PDP will determine what, if any, changes may need to be made to
the existing Introduction of New Generic Top-Level Domains policy
recommendations from 2007
¤

¤

¤

Original policy recommendations as adopted by the GNSO Council
and ICANN Board were “designed to produce a systemized and
ongoing mechanisms for applicants to propose new top-level domains”
They will remain in place for subsequent application processes unless
the GNSO Council adopts changes as a result of this PDP

Potential changes may include:
¤

Clarifying, amending or overriding existing policy principles,
recommendations, and implementation guidance;

¤

Developing new policy recommendations;
Supplementing or developing new implementation guidance

¤
Notes:

• Principles, recommendations, and implementation guidance from the GNSO’s 2007 Final Report on the
Introduction of New gTLDs are available in Annex B

| 6

Status of work and the methodology adopted by the PDP Working Group
What is the WG currently working on?

1

A total of 38 subjects in the WG’s charter and 6 have been identified as high-level, overarching
subjects. Preliminary discussions have taken place and community input has been sought on
these subjects

When will the other 32 subjects be addressed?

2

WG expects to divide into a series of sub teams to conduct preliminary discussions and again,
seek community input on the remaining subjects

How will the WG conduct its work?

3

WG will conduct preliminary discussions, seek input from community, integrate work from
other efforts, and only then will it reach conclusions (e.g., recommendations)

| 7

What are the other concurrent efforts that may impact this PDP?

Competition, Consumer
Trust & Consumer Choice
Review Team

CWG on Use of Country
and Territory Names

Work in the GAC,
ALAC, SSAC, etc.

GNSO PDP on Review
of All RPMs in all
gTLDs

Completion of work
on protection for IGOINGO names and
acronyms

| 8

How will concurrent efforts affect the PDP?
For example…
CCT-RT

1

The PDP WG may delay consideration and development of policy recommendations until
data, analysis, and recommendations on topics of high interest to the CCT-RT are complete

Geographic Names and Culturally Significant Names

2

Receiving feedback from CWG-UCTN, for instance, could lead to policy development, possibly
as part of New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

IGO/INGO

3

Will need to account for and integrate Board approved recommendations/implementation
elements related to Reserved Names and TLD startup (claims notifications)

| 9

Work Tracks
Overarching Subjects

1

Continuing new gTLDs, different TLD
categories, predictability, application limits,
etc.

4

Applications from underserved regions,
accreditation programs, AGB, etc.

5

WT2: Legal/Regulatory

3

Reserved names, base registry agreement,
registrar non-discrimination, PICs, global
public interest, etc.

Notes:

String similarity, objections, community
applications, accountability/challenge
mechanisms, etc.

WT4: IDNs, Technical & Operational

WT1: Process/Support/Outreach

2

WT3: String Contention, Objections,
Dispute Resolution

6

IDNs, security & stability, applicant reviews,
name collisions, etc.

WT5: Operational Implementation
Guidance
Subjects TBD – consider if certain areas may not
require policy development and guidance could
be provided before PDP completes

• Full list of subjects available in Annex A

| 10

PDP WG High Level Work Plan
Overarching	Issues

Review

Seek	Input

Recommendations

Work	Track	1:	Sub-team

Review

Seek	Input

Recommendations

Possibly	Q3	2017

Work	Track	…	Sub-teams

Review

Seek	Input

Recommendations

Work	Track	5:	Sub-team

Review

Seek	Input

Possibly	End	of	2017

Recommendations
Initial	Report	(PC)

• Subjects	in	each	work	track	will	be	sequenced
• Must	consider	other	 New	gTLD related	efforts,	 work	plan	will	be	designed	
accordingly	if	there	are	dependencies	 in	completing	 aspects	of	the	PDP	WG’s	work

Final	Report

| 11

Topics of broad community interest

Topics

CWG – Use of
Country and
Territory Names

Competition,
Consumer Trust &
Consumer Choice
Review Team

Community
applications

Geographic
names and other
names of public
interest

Promoting
applications from
underserved
regions/developing
countries

Safeguards / PICs

| 13

Topics

How can
implementation
work proceed in
parallel with policy
development?

Streamling the
.Brand process

| 14

Cross Community Working Group on
the Use of Country and Territory
Names – Heather Forrest

Competition, Consumer Trust &
Consumer Choice Review Team –
Jonathan Zuck

Community applications – Mark
Carvell

Promoting applications from
underserved regions/developing
countries – Cheryl Langdon-Orr

Geographic names and other names
of public interest – Susan Payne

Safeguards / Public Interest
Commitments (PICs) – Alan
Greenberg

How can implementation work
proceed in parallel with policy
development? – Jeff Neuman

Streamlining the .Brand process – Jeff
Neuman

Next Steps

ICANN56

¤

PDP WG open face-to-face sessions:
¤ Wednesday, 1045-1200 (http://sched.co/7JMo) and 1330-1500
(http://sched.co/7Tvz) in Hall B
¤ Expected topics: current work and input received (including from
this session), work plan for future work

¤

PDP WG Wiki: https://community.icann.org/x/RgV1Aw

¤

PDP WG Charter: https://community.icann.org/x/KAp1Aw

¤

PDP Work Plan: https://community.icann.org/x/NAp1Aw

| 24

Annex A
Subjects from WG Charter – Divided into
work tracks

Overarching Subjects for which the WG is seeking community comment
• Additional gTLDs in the Future: Should there in fact be new gTLD subsequent
procedures and if not, what are the justifications for and ramifications of
discontinuing the program?
• TLD Differentiation: e.g. Brands, Geos, Communities – Does one size fit all? How
to account for different categories?
• Assessing Future gTLDs in “Rounds” depending on Scale of Demand: What are
the metrics, methods and implications?
• Predictability: Does community agree with WG’s assessment that this does not
require policy development work? Regardless, are there unforeseen
circumstances that would require policy work?
• Community Engagement: Does community agree with WG’s assessment that
this does not require policy development work?
• Limiting applications in total and/or per entity during an application window: Not
foreseen in 2007 policy – what requirements and assessment/enforcement
mechanisms might be needed?
• Others: How can the WG better enable community engagement during the PDP?
| 26

Proposed Work Track 1: Process / Support / Outreach
• Applicant Guidebook (AGB): Is the AGB the right implementation of the
GNSO recommendations for all parties (ROs, RSPs, Escrow Providers)?
• Clarity of Application Process: How can the application process avoid
developing processes on an as-needed basis (e.g., clarifying question
process, change request process, customer support, etc.)
• Applications Processing? Rounds? FCFS?
• Accreditation Programs: As there appears to be a limited set of technical
service and Escrow providers, would the program benefit from an
accreditation program for third party service providers? If so, would this
simplify the application process with a set of pre-qualified providers to
choose from?
• Systems: How can the systems used to support the New gTLD Program,
such as TAS, Centralized Zone Data Service, Portal, etc. be made more
robust, user friendly, and better integrated?
• Application Fees: Evaluate accuracy of cost estimates and/or review the
methodology to develop the cost model.
• Support for Applicants From Developing Countries
| 27

Proposed Work Track 2: Legal / Regulatory
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Reserved Names List and Mechanism for Release
Base Registry Agreement / Differentiation?
PICs? Is this the rights way to implement restrictions?
Registrant Protections
Contractual Compliance
Registry/Registrar Separation
Registrar Non-Discrimination
TLD Rollout
2nd Level RPCs
Global Public Interest / GAC Advice / Safeguards
IGO / INGO Protections
Closed Generics

| 28

Proposed Work Track 3: String Contention / Objections & Disputes

•
•
•
•
•
•

Freedom of Expression vs. GAC Advice, community processes and
reserved names
String Similarity Evaluations (Effective? Fair? Efficient?)
Objections – Review rules around standing, fees, consolidation,
consistency of outcomes? Appeals? Oversight over Process/
Role of Independent Objector
Accountability Mechanisms
Community Applications and Community Priority Evaluations

| 29

Proposed Work Track 4: Internationalized Domain Names, Technical & Operational
•

•
•
•
•
•

Internationalized Domain Names and Universal Acceptance: Consider how
to encourage adoption of gTLDs. Evaluate whether rules around IDNs
properly accounted for recommendations from IDN WG. Determine and
address policy guidance needed for the implementation of IDN variant TLDs.
Security and Stability: Were the proper questions asked to minimize the risk
to the DNS and ensure that applicants will be able to meet their obligations in
the registry agreement?
Should there be non-scored questions and if so, how should they be
presented?
Were the proper criteria established to avoid causing technical instability?
Applicant Reviews: Technical/Operational and Financial: Were Financial and
Technical criteria designed properly to allow applicants to demonstrate their
capabilities while allowing evaluators to validate their capabilities?
Name Collision: What measures may be needed to manage risks for 2012round gTLDs beyond their 2 year anniversary of delegation, or gTLDs
delegated prior to the 2012 round?
| 30

Proposed Work Track 5: Operational Implementation Guidance

•

Subjects TBD – identify subjects that do not require policy development and
where implementation guidance could be provided before PDP is complete.

| 31

Annex B
Existing policy recommendations from 2007
Final Report on the Introduction of New gTLDs

2007 GNSO Policy Recommendations: 7 Principles
PRINCIPLES MISSION & CORE VALUES
A
B
C

D

E

F
G

New generic top-level domains (gTLDs) must be introduced in an orderly, timely and
predictable way.
Some new generic top-level domains should be internationalised domain names (IDNs)
subject to the approval of IDNs being available in the root.
The reasons for introducing new top-level domains include that there is demand from
potential applicants for new top-level domains in both ASCII and IDN formats. In addition
the introduction of new top-level domain application process has the potential to promote
competition in the provision of registry services, to add to consumer choice, market
differentiation and geographical and service-provider diversity.
A set of technical criteria must be used for assessing a new gTLD registry applicant to
minimise the risk of harming the operational stability, security and global interoperability of
the Internet.
A set of capability criteria for a new gTLD registry applicant must be used to provide an
assurance that an applicant has the capability to meets its obligations under the terms of
ICANN's registry agreement.
A set of operational criteria must be set out in contractual conditions in the registry
agreement to ensure compliance with ICANN policies.
The string evaluation process must not infringe the applicant's freedom of expression
rights that are protected under internationally recognized principles of law.
| 33

19 Recommendations (1/3)
1

2
3

ICANN must implement a process that allows the introduction of new top-level domains.
The evaluation and selection procedure for new gTLD registries should respect the
principles of fairness, transparency and non-discrimination.
All applicants for a new gTLD registry should therefore be evaluated against transparent
and predictable criteria, fully available to the applicants prior to the initiation of the
process. Normally, therefore, no subsequent additional selection criteria should be used
in the selection process.

Strings must not be confusingly similar to an existing top-level domain or a Reserved
Name.
Strings must not infringe the existing legal rights of others that are recognized
or enforceable under generally accepted and internationally recognized principles of law.
Examples of these legal rights that are internationally recognized include, but are not
limited to, rights defined in the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industry Property (in
particular trademark rights), the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (in particular freedom of
expression rights).

4

Strings must not cause any technical instability.

5

Strings must not be a Reserved Word.
| 34

19 Recommendations (2/3)
6 Strings must not be contrary to generally accepted legal norms relating to morality and
public order that are recognized under international principles of law.
Examples of such principles of law include, but are not limited to, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (UDHR), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
intellectual property treaties administered by the World Intellectual Property Organisation
(WIPO) and the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS).
7 Applicants must be able to demonstrate their technical capability to run a registry operation
for the purpose that the applicant sets out.
8 Applicants	must	be	able	to	demonstrate	their	financial	and	organisational	operational	capability.
9 There must be a clear and pre-published application process using objective and
measurable criteria.
1 There must be a base contract provided to applicants at the beginning of the application
0 process.
1 [Replaced with Recommendation 20 and Implementation Guideline P and inserted into Term
1 of Reference 3 Allocation Methods section]
| 35

19 Recommendations (3/3)
12
13

Dispute resolution and challenge processes must be established prior to the start of the
process.
Applications must initially be assessed in rounds until the scale of demand is clear.

14

The initial registry agreement term must be of a commercially reasonable length.

15

There must be renewal expectancy.

16

Registries must apply existing Consensus Policies and adopt new Consensus Policies
as they are approved.

17

A clear compliance and sanctions process must be set out in the base contract which
could lead to contract termination.

18

If an applicant offers an IDN service, then ICANN's IDN guidelines must be followed.

19

Registries must use only ICANN accredited registrars in registering domain names and
may not discriminate among such accredited registrars.

20

An application will be rejected if an expert panel determines that there is substantial
opposition to it from a significant portion of the community to which the string may be
explicitly or implicitly targeted.

| 36

Implementation Guidelines (1/5)
MISSION & CORE VALUES
IG A The application process will provide a pre-defined roadmap for applicants that
encourages the submission of applications for new top-level domains.
IG B Application fees will be designed to ensure that adequate resources exist to cover the
total cost to administer the new gTLD process.
Application fees may differ for applicants.
IG C ICANN will provide frequent communications with applicants and the public including
comment forums.
IG D A first come first served processing schedule within the application round will be
implemented and will continue for an ongoing process, if necessary.
Applications will be time and date stamped on receipt.
IG E The application submission date will be at least four months after the issue of the
Request for Proposal and ICANN will promote the opening of the application round.
IG F If there is contention for strings, applicants may:
i) resolve contention between them within a pre-established timeframe
ii) if there is no mutual agreement, a claim to support a community by one party will
be a reason to award priority to that application. If there is no such claim, and
no mutual agreement a process will be put in place to enable efficient
resolution of contention and;
iii) the ICANN Board may be used to make a final decision, using advice from staff
and expert panels.
| 37

Implementation Guidelines (2/5)
IG G

Where an applicant lays any claim that the TLD is intended to support a particular
community such as a sponsored TLD, or any other TLD intended for a specified
community, that claim will be taken on trust with the following exceptions:
(i) the claim relates to a string that is also subject to another application and the claim
to support a community is being used to gain priority for the application; and
(ii) a formal objection process is initiated.
Under these exceptions, Staff Evaluators will devise criteria and procedures to
investigate the claim.
Under exception (ii), an expert panel will apply the process, guidelines, and definitions
set forth in IG P.

IG H

External dispute providers will give decisions on objections.

IG I

An applicant granted a TLD string must use it within a fixed timeframe which will be
specified in the application process.

IG J

The base contract should balance market certainty and flexibility for ICANN to
accommodate a rapidly changing market place.

| 38

Implementation Guidelines (3/5)

IG K

ICANN should take a consistent approach to the establishment of registry fees.

IG L

The use of personal data must be limited to the purpose for which it is
collected.

IG M

ICANN may establish a capacity building and support mechanism aiming at
facilitating effective communication on important and technical Internet
governance functions in a way that no longer requires all participants in the
conversation to be able to read and write English.

IG N

ICANN may put in place a fee reduction scheme for gTLD applicants from
economies classified by the UN as least developed.

IG O

ICANN may put in place systems that could provide information about the
gTLD process in major languages other than English, for example, in the six
working languages of the United Nations.

| 39

Implementation Guidelines (4/5)
IG P

The following process, definitions and guidelines refer to Recommendation 20.
Process
Opposition must be objection based.
Determination will be made by a dispute resolution panel constituted for the purpose.
The objector must provide verifiable evidence that it is an established institution of
the community (perhaps like the RSTEP pool of panelists from which a small panel
would be constituted for each objection).
Guidelines
The task of the panel is the determination of substantial opposition.
a) substantial
b) significant portion
c) community
d) explicitly targeting
e) implicitly targeting
f) established institution
The following ICANN organizations are defined as established institutions: GAC,
ALAC, GNSO, ccNSO, ASO.
g) formal existence
h) detriment

| 40

Implementation Guidelines (5/5)

IG Q

ICANN staff will provide an automatic reply to all those who submit public
comments that will explain the objection procedure.

IG R

Once formal objections or disputes are accepted for review there will be a
cooling off period to allow parties to resolve the dispute or objection before
review by the panel is initiated.

| 41

