EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 17:00 to 18:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

AVRI DORIA:

If I can ask people to find their seats.

We've got such an

incredibly packed program that we really need to start or we'll
never get it all in.
Wow, and they got quiet.
Okay. My name is Avri Doria. I'm one of the co-chairs of the New
gTLD Subsequent Procedures Policy Development Process
Working Group. That is a mouthful. And basically welcoming
you to this cross-community discussion on the New gTLD
Subsequent Procedures Working Group work.
I'm going to start here with some introductions, and then we're
going to go to have a status update.
Can we have the slide moved to the next one, please, that gives - yes.
So starting with an introduction here.
Now, the first thing in the introduction I wanted to say is, first of
all, these microphones, except for the ones on the front desk,
are not on. With the Cross-Community Working Group, there's

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

these (indicating) microphones and there are wonderful people
roaming around with these microphones with numbers and all
kinds of stuff, and you can see them if you turn around; that
when it comes time to speak, they'll come to you with a
microphone. So these microphones (indicating) except for the
front have is not been given a privilege.
The other thing I'd like to ask is to sign into the Adobe Connect
room and you'll find that there is a -- two questions down at the
bottom, one on affiliation and one on knowledge of topic. And
this is part of the cross-community effort to sort of understand
who is in the room. I'll try not to use the word "audience"
because we're trying to make this participatory, but who is in
the room talking about the issue, so that there is a better notion
of the mix.
Okay. So in terms of the program, once I finish this quick bit of
introductions, Jeff will give a -- Jeff Neuman, who is one of the
other two co-chairs -- well, there's three co-chairs, but I'm one of
them, so the other two. The other one is Steven Coates who
can't be with us because he's doing NomCom duty. So Jeff
Neuman will then go through the status of the program and give
an update.
And then we're going to go into a discussion of topics that were
of broad community interest. And these were topics that the

Page 2 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

people in the working group thought of some, but people in the
other ACs and SOs basically brought up these topics as being the
topics of interest.
So we will have topics that we will go through, and this will be
the order in which I'll go through. We'll be doing CrossCommunity Working Group on the use of country ask territory
names, and Heather Forrest will be talking about.
Then we will have okay. I have to get it in front of me because it
was more than I can remember. Then competition, consumer
trust and consumer choice review team, which Jonathan Zuck
will be speaking on. Then community applications Mark Carvell
will be speaking on. Promoting applications from underserved
regions and developing countries Cheryl Langdon-Orr will be
speaking on. Geographic names and other names of public
interest Susan Payne will be speaking on. Safeguards, public
interest commitments, PICs, Alan Greenberg will be speaking. I
don't know if he's here, but he'll hopefully be here by that time.
How can implementation work proceed in parallel with policy
development, Jeff will be speaking on that one again. And
streamlining the .brand process, Jeff will also be covering that
one.
Now, in terms of the speaking, just to give this a brief
introduction, they will make a few comments. We've asked

Page 3 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

them to keep the comments to a minute or so, and then they will
basically be moderating a conversation with you all for a few
minutes on those issues. And this is experimental so we're going
to see how this really works.
And then we're going to talk briefly about the next steps and the
meetings that we still have coming up tomorrow on this issue.
So having started that, and we have -- I guess it's time to begin.
So, Jeff, can I get you to do the status update?

And it's

microphone 6.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Okay. Let's test this out. Is this working?
Okay. I'm going to actually stand up. I don't want to hear any
jokes. I can hear them coming.
[ Laughter ]
But I thought it would be better, you know. It's the last session
of the day. Everyone is tired. Everyone is ready to go to a bunch
of pretty cool receptions that are after this. I don't think I got an
invite, but I think they're happening.
So I'm going to introduce -- if we can go to the next slide, a little
bit, some introductory slides so we can just kind of set the tone,
and then we can go into the real meat of the discussion.

Page 4 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

This is supposed to be for feedback. So just a little bit in the way
of background.
We're a policy development working group of the GNSO, and this
actually got started in June of 2015. There was a discussion
group that was created to talk about the many issues and kind
of scope out the work of a policy development process.
And finally, on June 24th, 2015, the council requested a
preliminary issue report. Preliminary issue report was published
for public comment, and there were a number of comments.
The GNSO Council initiated the policy development process in
December of 2015. In January, there was a charter that was
approved, and finally in February we started to meet on a
weekly basis, this working group, and we've been doing that for
a number of months now, and I think it's been a great
experience so far and we're really just starting to get into the
meat of our work.
Steve, if you want to go to the next one.
So, really, the role of the PDP is to determine what changes, if
any, need to be made to the original policy that was back in
2007. In 2007, which is, if I do my math correctly, nine years ago,
almost exactly nine years ago, in fact, if not a little more, I'm
trying to remember the month, the GNSO said that we should

Page 5 of 69

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

have a predictable process for the introduction of new generic
top-level domains.

And that policy recommendation was

established -- was actually approved by unanimous -unanimously by the GNSO Council and ultimately was approved
by the board.
That policy still remains in effect. So judging from the -- you
know we're a bottom-up policy development process, a
multistakeholder organization, so absent anything to the
contrary, we will have additional new gTLDs. That's important.
So we're now talking about what potential changes can be made
to the process that was ultimately implemented in 2012.
So potential changes, the scope of this working group, we could
talk about potential changes to clarify that process that
happened the 2012 round. We can amend that process, we can
override

that

process,

we

can

develop

new

policy

recommendations, or we can supplement and develop new
implementation guidance.
Let's go on to the next slide.
So what are we currently working on? The first thing we did,
there were a total of 38 subjects that were in the charter for us to
look at. What we've done is -- and an additional six overarching
issues. So 44. Again, this is math. Not my strong suit. 44 total

Page 6 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

subjects which we divided into six overarching issues and five
work tracks which we actually later reduced to four. We'll talk
about that in a second.
So we've talked -- we've had some preliminary discussions on
these overarching issues, and we have issued what we call CC1,
or community comment 1, which has gone out for input from the
constituency stakeholder groups, advisory committees. Am I
forgetting another? I think there were three -- what's that? And
the review team, that's right.

To get comment on these

overarching issues. And there are 32 other subjects that we will
address through what we call work tracks, and those work
tracks are divided into -- there are four or five, depending how
you look at it, different work tracks, which I believe are on a
subsequent slide.

And we will conduct our work through

discussions, seek input from the community, and integrate other
efforts that are going on.
Go to the next one.
So what are some of the other things that are going on that will
affect this policy development process, things that we're
watching as a work group -- as a working group group.
Well, as many of you know and have heard throughout this -- I
think it was yesterday that Jonathan had presented, the
consumer -- the competition, consumer trust, and consumer

Page 7 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

choice review team. So that's required by the Affirmation of
Commitments, a review that's going on. We will certainly, and
we're required by our charter to consider the input and the
findings of that review team. And Jonathan will talk a little bit
about that.
There's the Cross-Community Working Group on the use of
country and territory names. Heather will talk a little bit about
that. We have to consider the findings of that group into our
working group as well.
There's a policy development process on the review of all rights
protection mechanisms in all gTLDs.

That was a cross-

community session that was held yesterday afternoon that
many of you have attended that was led by their co-chairs.
There is obviously work going on in the GAC and the ALAC and
the SSAC and other organizations that will feed into our working
group. And there's the completion of work and protection for
IGO/INGO names and acronyms including some implementation
that's going on now on how to develop a claims-like process for
IGO and INGOs.
Go on to the next -- We can just go on to the next slide because
we went through those. I'm trying to get to the input slides here.
So the work tracks we talked about. So the other subjects are
divided into, we see here, two through six. So there's one work

Page 8 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

track that's on process/support/outreach, very important work
track which will talk about how we get more diversity in the
application process. How do we do better outreach to make
sure that those from the underserved countries can -- and
developing countries can apply.
We'll also talk about whether the Applicant Guidebook is the
appropriate approach to continue doing this new gTLD process;
whether there should be different guidelines or guidebooks for
the different types top-level domains if we believe that
categorization of top-level domains is the way forward.
The second work track deals with legal and regulatory issues,
things like the base registry agreement. Are there any changes
that are needed to that? Registrar nondiscrimination clauses or
vertical integration issues that were heavily debated started in
2009 through 2012. Was that everything we expected it to be?
Are there certain changes that need to be made? Did we get it
right. How do we deal with that going forward.
To talk about in that as well the PICs. And Alan, if he gets here -oh, he is here. Hey, Alan. Hi. Alan will talk about PICs and
safeguards. That will also be something that will feed into that
work track.
Work track three is on string contention, objections, and dispute
resolution. Looking at issues like string similarity, the whole

Page 9 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

issue of plural versus singulars. Yes, the board considered that
issue and made a preliminary determination, but that wasn't
through the bottom-up policy development process. We have a
time, if we choose, to correct that going forward. We'll provide
more clear guidance in the next round.
Also things like what if there is a string similarity decision, what
is the process for appealing that? Should there be a process to
appeal those decisions? If so, who hears those appeals.
Work track four will look at issues, internationalized domain
names and other technical and operational issues. Things like
universal acceptance. If we agree also, there's one subject I'll
talk about a little later which is potentially accrediting technical
registry back-end providers so that they don't have to be
evaluated 300 times if they happen to support 300 applications.
And so if we decide that is a way forward, that track can look at
what are the technical requirements for a registry back-end
provider.
And of course there will be a final operational implementation
guidance work track which really is to be determined.
What we're going to do during some later sessions this week, our
actual working sessions, is talk about whether these work tracks
cover all of the areas that we need to look at.

Page 10 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

So we have developed a high-level work plan, on the next slide
you'll see. Everyone is asking about timelines. And so if you go
to the next slide. I know it's going to come up. There we go.
This is our initial thinking in terms of timelines. This is not a
guarantee.

This is not predicting that we will have a new

process that starts on the dates set -- that are set forth on this
slide. I'm not sure why it's not showing the whole slide. I don't
know if we can shrink it, Steve, so it's showing some dates over
there. There you go. Possibly the end of 2017. We're not saying
that's when we are introducing new gTLDs. That's just a goal for
us to finish our work.
Of course, as I said before, our work is also dependent on the
CCT review team and other reviews that are going on. So that all
has to feed into the process.
Ultimately, like every policy development process, we'll have an
initial report, put out our recommendations and findings, put it
out for comment, and a final report. We may, in fact, have
multiple public comment periods on the issues so that it may
not be just one preliminary report and a final report. We may
decide to put out questions to the community. For example,
when we start some of the work tracks or when we have some
initial thoughts on some of those findings.

Page 11 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

AVRI DORIA:

I've got a hand up and I would like to --

JEFF NEUMAN:

Okay. There's a hand up already.

AVRI DORIA:

So I have a hand up, and just in case it's a point of order type of
question.
So, Sebastien, I don't know where you are to get a microphone
to you. Okay.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

AVRI DORIA:

Okay. Thank you. Now, that wasn't said through a microphone
so let me repeat it. It was a request for slower speaking because
the translators were having trouble keeping up with the speed at
which the speaker was speaking. So I'm asking to speak slower.
And, also, for those who don't have translation, having -- for
example, that aren't one of the seven privileged languages that
have translation, so that they would be able to have a chance to
understand and to read.

Page 12 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

So it was a point of order, so thank you, Sebastien.

JEFF NEUMAN:

Thank you, Sebastien. Could we have mic 6? Thank you. I will
try to slow down. I'm just so excited about these topics that
sometimes I speed up.
People who know me, actually, it is true, I am excited by these
subjects.
So this is, again, a temporary -- or our work plan as to the
milestones we'd like to achieve and the pace at which we would
like to -- to go. Of course it's, like we said, very dependent on the
work of some other groups so that we can make sure that that
feeds into our processes.
Do we want to go on to the next slide?
Okay. So now we're going to get into our topics, the real meat,
but before we do, I should actually ask if there are any questions
on some of the process of how the working group is going about
doing what we're doing.
And I see one question over here. I know it's Jordyn Buchanan.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Page 13 of 69

(Off microphone.)

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

AVRI DORIA:

Oh, they've got it? Okay. So...

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Is this just a time for questions or can we make comments as
well?
[ Laughter ]

AVRI DORIA:

At this point, we'd really like to go for clarifying questions and
then take comments in as we --

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Well, are there going to be an opportunity for comments on the
overall process as opposed to individual --

AVRI DORIA:

Oh, a process question. Okay.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Well, it's about -- what -- everything Jeff just talked about is
what I want to speak to but not about any of the individual
topics, but it's definitely a comment, not a question.

Page 14 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

Go ahead at this point.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

All right. I'll go with it.

EN

So Jordyn Buchanan with Google but I'm speaking entirely in my
personal capacity at the moment.
Like, I know you guys are working really hard and this is a lot of
work, but I guess I'm going to suggest that I think you're doing
this completely wrong. And I say that because I think you're
making your life much harder for yourselves than you need to.
We have a policy. We have even an implementation of the
policy. We just did it, and we're just getting to the end of the last
instantiation of it.
And for some reason, we insist on treating the release of TLDs in
a manner completely unique at ICANN. Every other identifier
that ICANN allocates gets done basically on an as-needed basis.
If you need to become a new registrar and get a registrar ID, you
come to ICANN, you submit your accreditation papers, they let
you be there. If the IETF needs a new protocol number, they
come to ICANN, they say, "Hey, we need a new protocol
number," they get one. There's no, like, giant process where you
wait like eight years before we're doing the next batch of
protocol number releases. That would be crazy and it would

Page 15 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

make it so if you did it, then the IETF would have to, you know,
spend years and years thinking about how we might do the next
giant release of protocol numbers because we created this
tremendous, immense importance around that process.
But instead, if you'd just sort of release these things as they went
along and relied on the fact that we have a binding policy
process, it would let you fix mistakes as you went along.
And there's just no reason why you couldn't, next week, just
start a new application process under the existing guidebook.
It's not perfect. I might not apply again because there's things
about it that annoyed me. But it's not bad either. Nothing
terrible -- you know, no babies died. Like we haven't heard from
any of the name collision things that any human life was
threatened as a result of this.
You know, some -- some brands, I'm sure, are a little grumpy
that they had to apply to get too many defensive registrations,
but some brands are grumpy that they're not able to get their
new TLDs as well. Everything is not perfect and there's a cost -there's a cost to both sides --

AVRI DORIA:

Page 16 of 69

Okay.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

-- and --

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. I -- it was a question. We got the question. But I
really would like to avoid too long a speech.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

All right. Well, then I will just finish by saying it seems like if you
just focused on -- if -- identifying any problems that were so
critical that they would prevent the release of additional TLDs
now and move to a sustainable process where you're
continuously releasing them and rely, like we do for all other
identifiers, on the -- on course-correcting as we go instead of
trying to get it all right up front, that you would have a much
more -- your job would be easier and the community would
probably be able to be involved on the individual issues instead
of trying to stare into this huge giant box of issues that seems
almost impenetrable to someone not --

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

-- intimately involved in the work.

Page 17 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

JEFF NEUMAN:

EN

All right. Thanks.
[ Applause ]
Okay. That's a good comment. So instead of me answering this
question, because it's not for me to discuss, would anyone else
like to address Jordyn's point?
How does everybody feel? Should we open up a round or open
up a TLD application process next week?

UNKNOWN SEPAKER:

(Off microphone.)

JEFF NEUMAN:

Does everybody feel like we could do that? Does anybody want
to comment on that?
I think that's a good question.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

AVRI DORIA:

I don't.

Page 18 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

AVRI DORIA:

Okay. I mean, if we -- if we need to take that question, we need
to take that question, but that really isn't the program that we
had in front of us at this point.
But okay. I'll answer the question. Since he asked it, I'll give an
answer to that question.
One, we have a commitment to reviewing the program before
we start any other program, so we're definitely still in the midst
of that review.
Two, we do have a fair amount of comments. There was a
drafting team that went before and gave us a list of scores of
issues that needed to be resolved before we could move on with
any particular program.
So there's definitely a lot of work that we've been committed to
before being able to just move on with the program as it was
once put forward.
So since you decided it was a good time to ask the question, I
thought -- but now --

Page 19 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

Okay. We had -- 3 was there before. I can't -- and then we've got
four questions going at the moment and then I'd like to stop at
that point so we can get back to the rest of -- of what was there.
So it would look like it was 3, 2, 4, and 5.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Hello? Hi.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

AVRI DORIA:

And there's a Number -- then I'll get to Number 1, too. I didn't
see it in my peripheral vision.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Let's have a referendum.
[ Laughter ]

AVRI DORIA:

I am not calling a referendum.
[ Applause ]

Page 20 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

No comment.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

You can exit.

EDMON CHUNG:

Okay. Edmon Chung here. Now, trying to get back to what the
guys in front want us to get to, a clarifying question, actually, on
Work Track 4 that you identified.
I know you know that I love IDNs, but that's not what I want to
talk about.
The names collision part, is there any anticipation that other
work will happen?
Because this is a work track from the community, but the -- the
names collision report create- -- made .MAIL and .HOME -- you
know, created those situations.
There is no indication or no reports on future rounds, how -- how
to deal with these kind of situations where more of these TLDs
might suddenly come up and no longer be able to be used.
Is there anticipation that outside of this working group, other
work needs to be done on names collision for this to happen?

Page 21 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

Because there were five -- you had five boxes on a previous slide
that talks about external stuff that is ongoing that would
interfere -- well, not interfere but interact with this discussion. Is
there any anticipation that names collision, there is actually
other work that needs to happen as well?

AVRI DORIA:

I don't know if there's any work being done on that at the
moment. I've certainly seen signs of people talking about it. I
don't know if anybody else wanted to comment on that at the
moment.
It's certainly -- but if any other work was done on it in terms of
the current round -- in other words, the work in this working
group is only focused on a subsequent procedure. If any work is
done on anything to do with the current procedure, then that
work gets imported in, but the -- the work of this working group
is purely on the subsequent procedure, and it's really quite
possible that work be done on other issues. In fact, it's still
being done and still part of the reviews.
Now, what number did I say I was going to next? I said I was
going to -- to 2 next? Okay. Going to 2 next.

Page 22 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

IRAN:

EN

Thank you, Avri. Thank you, Avri. A question or comment was
made. Let us note that. And I fully agree with what you said.
You have a commitment -- we have a commitment and we have
to apply that commitment. We have started something. The
group has been established. Go ahead with what you have been
proposing. If there is anything that we have to add, to comment,
to clarify, to collect, we will do that, but I don't think that we
raise the question next week or not next week.
In GAC meeting, three meeting consequently we mentioned that
we need to review the previous one to see what are the
problems, difficulties, and so on and so forth. We have corrected
them and we said that we don't want that second round to be
started before we resolve the issue, problems, that we had in the
first round. Therefore, please kindly go ahead. Thank you.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.
And one thing I want to make sure to remind people of is, say
your name at the beginning.
Okay. Then I had -- what did I say? 4 next?
Okay. So 4, 5, and then 1. I can't count. Okay. Please. 4.

Page 23 of 69

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Muchas gracias.

Good morning.

Hello.

This is Sebastien

Bachollet. I am an individual user, and unfortunately I cannot
speak on behalf of Google because Google speaks on its own
representation, so it will be difficult to say why he is saying that.
But I would like to say that fortunately you are being working on
this and there are many other aspects that are being included
which were not included in the previous program and there are
many corrections to be -- to work with.
When we have -- when we have a program, we need to address
these issues. So I hope that next time you -- new extensions are
being introduced, well, if that is the case, we have fewer issues.
Your work is really very important.

WERNER STAUB:

Thank you. Werner Staub from CORE association.
I hate to say I told you so, but I've been on the mic numerous
times to say please make sure we announce the next round
immediately. Not just the next round but the one after. Because
if you don't, people will apply simply because, you know, they
think there's going to be a long desert, it's the last petrol station
before the desert.

Page 24 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

It happens. And if we have now one result that we can learn, it
is: Don't do that again. And are we about to do that again? A
long wait, telling everybody, "Look, there's going to be another
round but it's going to be 10 years of desert again," so we wait
10 years between rounds? That is the best way to do the worst
job possible.
And overall, the zeal that we put into find- -- preventing people
from damage is the biggest damage that we can do to it them.
Waiting forever, that is precisely the way you could kill all the
good projects and only leave the bad and speculative ones.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. And I'm really quite glad to hear that you hated
telling us that.
And Number 1, please.
[ Laughter ]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Hi. My name is (saying name) and I'm speaking in my personal
capacity here.
I'm just -- I just wanted to respond to Jordyn's point and I firstly
agree completely with what Avri said, but going beyond that, I

Page 25 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

think that there's also a substantive difference between names,
and for example, numbers.
I think that there are public policy issues that come in when it
comes to names that just don't exist when it comes to numbers
and many of the other things that -- you know, that we discuss
here that are delegated.
And ultimately names are the primary point of interface for a
normal user with the Internet, so these issues I think do matter
much more than they do in the case of numbers, for example.
And I agree babies didn't die, but that is a very high bar, and I
think that there are, for example, communities that lodged
community applications that haven't gotten their TLDs and we
need to look at the kinds of issues with process that led to those
kinds of problems.
And that's just an example.
And I'm not saying that the process we're considering here, that
we're thinking about here, is the best possible process. I haven't
applied my mind enough to know. But I do think that some kind
of review and, you know, trying to understand what we have -you know, what we can learn from the existing process to make
the process better going forward, that kind of effort needs to be
made.

Page 26 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Thank you.
And at this point, I'd like to go back to the program as planned,
and I want to thank the people that made short comments and
move on and ask -So the first one I had was cross-community working group on
the use of country and territory names, Heather Forrest. She'll
give us a quick introduction to it and then we could take a
couple questions quickly that she would be able to field. Thank
you.
Heather?

HEATHER FORREST:

Thank you, Avri, very much.
This is Heather Forrest. Thank you very much for allowing us to
include this update in the work of the PDP, the subsequent
procedures PDP.
This is work that's been ongoing for some time now. Some of
you may have heard me or one of my fellow co-chairs give an
update in previous sessions in previous meetings, so you'll know
that we've been at this work for -- for as much as -- as much as a
year and a half now, perhaps even two years.

Page 27 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

And what I'm here to do today really is provide an update as to
the scope and the status of our work so that you might draw
some mental connections between the work that we're doing
and the work that likely fits into, I think we decided, the batch
with reserved names, so that's number two, I think, and start to
better inform ourselves across these lines as to how we want to
take things forward.
So I'll provide that brief introduction and then put a plug for our
session, which is tomorrow afternoon, and then maybe we'll
shunt questions into that, Avri, rather than have them here
today, although of course I'm happy to answer questions, but
that might be a better place for those.
So this cross-community working group on the use of country
and territory names as top-level domains, probably keywords
missing from the introduction on this slide, we're dealing only
with the top level and only with country and territory names.
Now, as it stands at the moment, the group has defined country
and territory names as things falling into three baskets, if you
like. We have the use of two-letter codes largely aligning to the
use of the longstanding use of the ISO 3166-1 list. We have
three-letter codes again largely aligning to the ISO 3166
standard and names themselves. Now, names, of course, can
have a number of interpretations. The lawyers in the room, we
could argue this all day long as to what "names" means. We

Page 28 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

haven't gotten there as a group because it is quite a challenging
question and we wanted to work through, let's say, some less
challenging issues before we tackled the very big questions.
We've reached preliminary conclusions in relation to twocharacter codes, and we'll discuss those in more detail
tomorrow. And that was -- those preliminary conclusions were
reached in late 2015. The group then transitioned to working on
three-letter codes and began its work as we had done with twoletter codes by sending out a survey, an informal survey, to
solicit input from the community more broadly to understand
the community's views as to what policy might look like, let's
say preferred policy, options from various community members.
And what's interesting in that process, perhaps not surprising
but nevertheless interesting, is that we have completely
divergent responses in relation to what to do with three-letter
codes, completely divergent both in rationale and in preferred
outcome.
That led us to the idea of a broader cross-community session
here in the policy forum at ICANN56 which will take place
tomorrow in this very room, which is Hall A at 3:15. We'll have a
format quite similar to this one in this session today. We'll ask
some provocative questions for the precise purpose of soliciting
perhaps some provocative answers and see if we can't as a

Page 29 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

broader community work through some of the challenges that
we face.
So that is our update. I'm happy, as I say, to take any questions.
But, otherwise, I very warmly invite you to our cross-community
session tomorrow at 3:15 tomorrow.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. Are there any questions? I see one here. Two.
Please go ahead.

IRAN:

Thank you very much. You said that if we need lawyers to tell us
what the name is. We don't need to have that. Name is names.
That's all. If Dahomey decided to call the country Benin home, it
is the Dahomey and all the people who decide. If Upper Volta
decided to call Burkino Faso, that is Upper Volta or Burkino Faso
people. So we don't need.
We thank you very much, the lawyers, and we ask them later on
to deal something where we apply and where we require. We
don't need any explanation on the name of the countries. Thank
you.

Page 30 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Thank you. And please remember to give your name at the
beginning.
So far I have 1 and 4. Do I have anything after 1 and 4? I'm trying
to be good with my numbers. Okay. Please, 1.

NIGERIA:

Thank you for the opportunity to speak. My name is Nkiru from
Nigeria.
You said something about having the preliminary conclusions on
your decisions on the two-character and three-character codes.
Would it be possible to have this document prior to tomorrow's
meeting so we can go through it?

HEATHER FORREST:

This is Heather Forrest. Thank you very much for your question.
I would encourage you. We actually have two Web sites which is
perhaps confusing. One is under the ccNSO Web page; and there
is one more general, I think in fact, under the GNSO Web page.
And you'll find -- you'll be able to track our documents through
that. So that's publicly available. If you were to type in -- do a
search on CWG UCTN, you'll find our documentation. Thank
you.

Page 31 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.

STEVE CHAN:

This is Steve Chan from staff. I was just going to say I can drop
the link into the AC room, if you are logged in, and give you more
direct access to that paper. Thanks.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you, Steve.
And question from 4. Please remember to introduce yourself.

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

Number 4. Wanawit, GAC, Thailand. As was mentioned about
the names, in fact, from what I study from the ccTLD fast track
on IDN, ICANN used to refer to the UNGEGN, United Nations
Group of Experts on Geographical Names, which already have
eight United Nation language translated.
And now is the update. They're one of the ECOSOCs. So the
name represent there should be something that we refer to,
even if some of the country having problem like, for example,
Thailand because the translation that happened, it's not as
accurate as what we normally use because when you are dealing
with these kind of transformations from non-Latin, non-ASCII
types to the Romanizations, it depends on how the authority

Page 32 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

that's dealing with that use formal translation. For example,
Thailand's official name is Ratcha Anachak Thai, which nobody
call it that way. You normally call either Thailand or maybe the
old name is Siam. But for some reasons, they filed that into the
database of UNGEGN.
So, in fact, those are the things that we're working on to reflect
the translation and transliterations. It creates an impact when
you are talking about the known domain names in the
Romanization way. Thank you.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. Heather.

HEATHER FORREST:

Thanks, Avri. Heather Forrest.
Thank you, Wanawit. You raise a very interesting point. And the
group is very much live to questions of translation. And I'm
pleased to say that we are quite privileged in the group
participating as members, representatives from ISO and from
the UNEGN. So that's helping to inform our work with these
broader questions.

Page 33 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Okay. Thank you. I'm going to now move on to Jonathan Zuck
and competition, consumer trust, and consumer choice review.
Yeah, you get to use those mics. Thanks.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Great. Jonathan Zuck from the CCT review team. Thanks for
having me here.
We were tasked by the Affirmation of Commitments to explore
the degree to which consumer choice, competition, and trust
were enhanced by the new gTLD program and also look at the
application and evaluation process to see if it was, quoteunquote, effective and finally look at the safeguards to see if
they were effective in kind of mitigating the downside
consequences of the new gTLD program.
And it's easy to get caught in the weeds of this topic. And that's
where I was headed as I was thinking about this. But I'm
reminded, Secretary Strickling came to visit our meeting in D.C.
and helped us to take a step back and say that basically the
purpose of the review is to see if the advantages of the new gTLD
program had outweighed the disadvantages of it. And so if you
look at it that way, then you look at what were the kind of
anticipated advantages of the program. Were more choices
made available to people so there were strings that had become

Page 34 of 69

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

unavailable in the legacy TLDs that were now available? Are
there interesting pricing business models that have increased
competition in the space and changed the pricing structure for
TLDs? Is there increased competition among registrars as well?
Is there an increase in consumer trust associated with doing
restricted TLDs, like .BANK, that would allow me to know that by
going to .BANK I could trust that it wasn't some sort of phishing
scheme.
And

what

are

the

downside

--

potential

downside

consequences? Does the fact that I have .BANK as a restricted
TLD and some other one not restricted mean that I have got
unmet consumer expectations? Do singulars and plurals create
confusion, for example? Did it lead to business models that
were based mainly on defensive strategies on the part of brands,
whether the defensive registrations are blocking, et cetera?
Does the program itself sustain, or is it really dependent on
defensive activities of brands? Did the application process, did it
really create choice for all communities around the globe? Is the
global south served well by the application evaluation process
or by the program itself?
So those are sort of the balancing tests that we have been
tasked with doing. I guess unlike the PDP -- and I realize I'm
talking very fast, Sebastien. I apologize. I will slow down a little
bit.

Page 35 of 69

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

Unlike the PDP process that Jeff described, we're sort of tasked
with time boxing our work. And so we're trying very hard to have
something in draft form to you by the end of the year. And that
meant having to prioritize. And so we're looking at some very
high-level questions like: Did this serve the developing world
well in the application process? Was competition created? Were
the safeguards effective? Is there a disproportionate increase in
DNS abuse in the new gTLDs? Asking questions like that help to
kind of make that balance more realistic.
And so the other thing that we're trying to do is come up with
measurable results which is somewhat new to the ICANN
community. I think we all have years and years of experience of
getting on conference calls and giving our opinions, learned
opinions, but opinions nonetheless about things. And so we're
trying very hard to do wherever possible a kind of quantitative
analysis

of

these

things

so

that

when

we

make

recommendations and policies are developed based on those
recommendations, we can later on see using the same data, the
same metrics, whether or not improvements came about as a
result of those recommendations.
So that's the task that we have before us. We've divided into
three subteams. Our calls are all public and that you can listen
in on them via Adobe Connect. You can email directly to the

Page 36 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

team via an email address inputtocctrt@icann.org or talk to the
people that represent you within that team.
There was an effort to kind of have somebody representing
everyone within that review team. So please make your voice
heard on these issues as we take this kind of high-level look at
whether or not a balance test applied to the new gTLD program
comes out in favor of the advantages that certainly exist and the
disadvantages that certainly exist.
And so trying to quantify, wherever possible, how that balance
was struck will hopefully inform further subsequent procedures,
whether they start next week as Jordyn has suggested or start in
a couple of years as is more likely the case.
I think there is kind of broad agreement with the nature of it
being a, quote-unquote, round is part of our problem and
created a difficulty to course correct along the way because of
the sheer volume of applications that happened. And so I think
there's probably consensus from -- in all the groups that are
working on this that a round is not the way to proceed.
But there's certainly some self-evaluation to do before we
proceed, I think, to see if we can get that balance right and make
sure that the advantages of introducing new strings into the DNS
outweigh the disadvantages of doing so. I'm happy to take
questions.

Page 37 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Thank you. One or two questions. We're already going through.
So I've got one question here and that's a Number 2. Please go
ahead and I will take one question after that just so we can get
through. Remember, please give your name.

INDONESIA:

Yes. My name is Ashwin from Indonesia. You mentioned about
the consumer trust and one of the -- you mention about if you
are using .BANK. And I'm sure it's not a phishing, it's a real bank.
Now, how can we make sure that it is like that, that .BANK
operator will really check -- the person who used that .BANK is
really a person. It's not a fake person or not whatever.
Now, if it's true, why can't we do that to other gTLD operators so
that there will be less and less crime in the Internet? If we can
do it through.BANK, can't we do it through .NET, .ORG, .COM,
and so on?
Today we have so many phishing and so many crimes because
of that joke that on the Internet you can be a doc and nobody
knows who you are. So let's try to do the same .BANK -- the
same measure that we used to do .BANK to any other gTLD.
Thank you.

Page 38 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thanks for your question. I suspect a lot of people have a lot of
answers to that question.

But I think at its core, it's an

experiment to see whether or not, you know, having a restricted
string like that will lead to an increase in consumer trust, will be
taken up by the industry that it's meant to represent, and we
can't assume that the answer for every possible string in the
dictionary is -- has a specific definition that we can rely on
because there are spin doctors as well as medical doctors. And
so the language is more fungible than that. So the question will
be, if .BANK is a success and leads to an increase in consumer
trust and, in fact, leads to a decrease in the success of phishing
exercises, I think you'll see other entrepreneurs taking that on in
pharmaceuticals and other areas and we'll see success in those
ways. And consumers, when looking for those kinds of high
stakes activities, will migrate to those restricted TLDs. I think
that it's a mistake to just create a regulation of the language in
lieu of understanding the success of those endeavors.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. I'd like the take one more question, preferably from
someone who does -- has not asked a question yet. Do we have
anyone here that has a question that hasn't asked one yet. No?

Page 39 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

Okay. Do you see one? I know Kavouss had one, but you've
already had three. But please, Kavouss, if you've got -- no, you
can't -- you need -- I think you need the number 2, although the
light went on.

IRAN:

No, Avri, it is up to you. If there are questions and there is no
other people to raise the question, please allow that we raise the
question.

AVRI DORIA:

And that's why I called on you.

IRAN:

Thank you very much. You are a very good friend of mine and I
always support you, unqualified support.

AVRI DORIA:

Well, thank you. And that's why I went to you. Now please, your
question.

IRAN:

This is a little bit of experience. If you say self-evaluation, I call
this self-validation, what are the tools that the people make that
self-evaluation? Based on the assessment or you give them a

Page 40 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

software or something, that this is the tool, use it before it's
applied to see whether you can have this self-evaluation or selfvalidations. Thank you.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thanks for the question, Kavouss. I think the issue is that we're
developing the tools now to perform those evaluations. So in
many respects, future reviews on competition, trust, and choice
might have an easier job of it because we will have established a
lot of the parameters used to measure the success of these
programs going forward. And so it's that first, you know, take at
it and identifying what datasets make the most sense, finding
the sources for that data that is an originating exercise but that
over time it could be something that's more easily done in a
shorter period of time because we've built the tools for
evaluation and evaluation and ongoing basis in a way that
Jordyn has suggested. I think that if we get our homework done
now that there will be some tools that make our lives easier
down the road.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. Now I'm going to move on to the --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

Page 41 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

One more question from number 1, and then we're moving on to
the next topic.

DANIEL EBANKS:

Daniel Ebanks, .KY, Cayman Islands. Very simple question. You
were talking about tools, and I had this in my mind from the
beginning of the session. How do we qualify the underserved
regions that we talk about?

How do you qualify as an

underserved region? That would be a great tool to develop as
well.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. Is that a question for you or one of the leadership?

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Sure. I think it may get answered more than once. And we're
confronting that same issue. Like, for example, does China fall
into that category and because they're better represented in the
new gTLD program than a lot of other regions. So we're going to
make our own definitions and try to stick to them, and I'm sure
that we'll get public feedback on those definitions and hopefully
refine them over time.

Page 42 of 69

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. And now I'd like to move to community applications
with Mark Carvell, please.

MARK CARVELL:

Thank you very much, Avri, and thank you very much for inviting
me to take part in this cross-community discussion. It's already
proving very lively and stimulating. And for those of you who
don't know me, I'm the U.K. representative on the GAC, and this - this topic of community-based gTLD applications has many
aspects to it. And obviously I don't have time to cover all of
those. It is an issue that's been picked up by -- by the GAC but
also by others in the community.

And there is indeed a

community TLDs action group and the ombudsman has picked
up on the experience of community-based applications in the
current round. And if we -- if we look back at the -- the vision, if
you

like,

the

expected

aims

of

the

GNSO

and

its

recommendations, it -- it saw that gT -- that community-based
applications would be an integral part of the community round.
But we've seen that vision not realized.

The number of

successful applications from communities has been very low,
and there was a high percentage of rejections of community
applications which were in contention. So the experience has
been a very discouraging one and points to possible areas of
deficiency and maybe even failure. And I think this is the time to
re -- to determine really the kind of questions that need to be

Page 43 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

asked if we are to learn from the experience and reassess the
whole approach to facilitating the opportunity for communitybased applications worldwide. I mean, this should have been an
important element of outreach to developing countries and
small island states. Where communities of business people, of
farmers and so on, may well have found an unprecedented
opportunity through a top-level domain to advance their
economic interest. So I just cite that as one example. It also
intersects with issues -- intersects with issues of rights and
communities wishing to express themselves. But as I say, the
experience has proved to be a very disappointing one when
we've seen even the successful applicants have a really tough
time pursuing their applications when they've been caught up in
various processes of review and challenge that has really
stretched their resources. So that's another sort of angle to this.
Anyway, I've touched on some. The ombudsman has done a
report and identified issues of concern. Let's now look at the
road ahead.
So I invite questions here. First of all, do you agree with the
basic premise that there's been a significant failure, and what
shall we do to try and identify how we can ensure that
communities have a real opportunity in the future, opportunities
whether it's a round or constant mechanism or whatever is
decided as the preferred mechanism to give them another

Page 44 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

chance. So I put that on the table and invite any comments and
questions.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.

Okay, take a couple questions now.

Please

remember to introduce yourself and please remember to keep
the questions short. I see two. What other questions do I see?
So I see -- no. So I see a number 2. Please.

PHILIP SHEPPARD:

Avri, thank you very much. It's Philip Sheppard here. Mark, I was
part of the original group which helped formulate some of this
policy, and certainly at that time we came up with what we felt
was sort of the concept of what community was supposed to be.
We did our best to make some broad definitions and we left it to
implementation to finally make those decisions and that led
indeed to the concept of independent panelists who review that.
And I think I'm not alone in feeling that a number of those
evaluations made by the panelists were just completely in the
opposite direction to our original concept of what was meant by
community. And frankly, my personal belief is that some of
them just got it wrong. They just interpreted the wording in
front of them too literally. They did not put it in context. And I
feel that has been the key reason things went awry here and the
community process was -- came out in a way that none of us

Page 45 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

envisaged. And I would recommend that we go back and try to
address that wording so that future panelists can understand
much better the concept and not create barriers that we had
never imagined in the process when we first discussed it.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you, Philip. Any other questions?
Oh, no, you wanted to --

MARK CARVELL:

Thank you, Avri, and thank you, Philip, for sort of providing a bit
of focus on the elements of process and interpretation and
definition which have gone wrong.
And, indeed, the ombudsman has pointed out, you know, a lack
of transparency and appeal process to sort of re-open a decision
based on the panel.
So, yes, I agree that's certainly one area to look at.
Thank you.

AVRI DORIA:

Page 46 of 69

Okay. Thank you.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

JEFF NEUMAN:

EN

Okay. This is Jeff Neuman. Just a comment. Thanks, Philip.
You know, you said that you thought it might be the panelist
that may have gotten it wrong.
I would actually proffer that it might be the drafting of the
criteria that got it wrong. I think the criteria was way too
stringent.

And I think the panelist actually interpreted the

criteria right in a lot of cases but they weren't given any
discretion to make other findings because the criteria was so
tight. And it seemed to a lot of people that the process was -because of the wording, was biased against communities.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.
We have number 2, and then I think there was a request for a
microphone down here. And so if one could come down here,
and then there will be a 3. So there's a 1 and then a 3, please.

BECKY BURR:

Becky Burr. Actually, I agree with Jeff. I think that the Applicant
Guidebook language was recognized by a lot of people from day
one to pose an incredibly high hurdle. And I think that there
were lots of people who said there would be no community TLDs
as a result of that.

Page 47 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

I think that was a huge mistake and an incredibly important
missed opportunity. And I really do hope we fix that.
I recognize that, you know, there's a -- it would be easy to make
it way too inclusive as well, as sort of, you know, the -- it was in
reaction to a community is whoever joins. But I think we got it -we just got it wrong in the last round.

AVRI DORIA:

Did you want to --

MARK CARVELL:

No. That's a very succinct point. Thank you.

AVRI DORIA:

Number 1.

MEGAN RICHARDS:

Is that me? Does it work? Yes, it's Megan Richards for the
record.
I just wanted to repeat something that Mark had said, and that is
that the ombudsman report made a whole series of objective,
clear identifications of issues that arose during this process. And
I think that's where the first starting point should be.

Page 48 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

And, Mark, there's one thing that you mentioned, was the
success rate. And I think you said do you think that's correct or
do you think this is right, but I think that's an objective and clear
assessment of what actually happened.
Now we have to find a way to improve this and make it better.
So it's a minor comment, but I just want to have it.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. And we had number 3.

EDMON CHUNG:

Yeah, Edmon Chung here. I want to make three comments on
this. One, the ombudsman report, the ombudsman, while it's
pretty thorough, missed a pretty important point.

It's the

community applications are not only supposed to be one part of
the program, it's supposed to be prioritized. And that's the
intent of the whole community program. And that leads into
some of the other problems.
So this is a big missing part that in fact the ombudsman didn't
really look into.
The second point I want to make is that it's not just the
Applicant Guidebook.

The Applicant Guidebook is already

stringent. But the EIU interpretation of the guidebook is even

Page 49 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

more stringent.

EN

One of the examples is that it kind of

consistently requires that one particular organization is -- you
know, does -- covers the entire global community, which is not
what the Applicant Guidebook says but, rather, somehow the
EIU decided to take that as a requirement rather than having
multiple community organizations cover the entire community.
This is very strange to me, and definitely not in the Applicant
Guidebook. And -- but anyway, it's applied in this round.
And the third part is -- the third comment I want to make as a
follow on to that is some of the interpretation is even more
absurd. Some of the interpretation is that if your community
name -- and I'll use .KIDS. Community name is .KIDS, and then
part of the community are children's rights organizations. So,
okay. The argument is that the children's rights organizations
can't be kids, so sorry, that's not part of the community. But
children, obviously they can't apply for domains and they need
representatives to do so, parents and children's rights
organizations.
So the interpretation of the Applicant Guidebook and how that is
applied is even more, you know, more absurd. So that part also
cannot be rectified in this particular round, but next round
definitely needs something to be done there.
Thank you.

Page 50 of 69

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

MARK CARVELL:

Yes, thank you very much, Edmon.

That's a very helpful

comment, too.
I think if I wrap up, I just sort of take away two important aspects
of this; that the prioritization had completely the opposite
effect. it became a kind of barrier. This is obviously a complete
dysfunctional setup.
And then, secondly, how it was interpreted in the process had
deficiencies, too. Lack of appeal and transparency, and so on.
But did somebody else want a question? Sorry. I jumped the
gun.

AVRI DORIA:

I had already considered third the last, but then I guess five gets
in there, and then we do have the last and move on to another
topic.
So please introduce yourself and make it very brief.

WERNER STAUB:

Werner Staub from CORE again.
Communities have -- the definition was misunderstood at some
point. I think that happened in the guidebook. And there was

Page 51 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

this concept of delineation that was introduced which is also
unclear, and some people then interpreted this as a community
is defined by whoever it excludes, which is nonsense. But let's
say nobody would actually say, "I'm a community who defines
by those who are not supposed to be inside."

That could

happen but that's not the definition of community.
However, what you failed to recognize is something that has
been documented from the beginning in ICANN, which is a
community is actually defined by its lines of accountability.
That's what's supposed to be a community. It can actually be
defined even later on. You can be an accountable party serving
a community, and there is one litmus test on whether you're
accountable; that is, when you can be removed. That is when
you are accountable.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you.
And now I'd like to move on to promoting applications from
underserved regions/developing countries. Cheryl Langdon-Orr.
Please.

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

Right-oh. Let's take a little temperature in the room. My name is
Cheryl Langdon-Orr, and I assume if you don't know me, you will

Page 52 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

have access to Google in the near future and you can look me
up, and that's what I'd advise you do.
Would you be so kind, ladies and gentlemen, as to just raise your
hand if any of you, regardless of how we define underserved
regions and communities, believe it is not a good idea to actively
promote new gTLD programs to these groups. However they're
defined. Is there anyone who is willing? I'm hoping that one of
you might be brave, but we will take names and addresses.
Is anyone going to state here that you believe it is not a good
idea to actively promote and work ways to promote these new
gTLDs to the, however it's defined, underserved regions and
communities? I have one.
Two? Okay. Fine. Three.
I want to come back to that question when we finish off to see if
some of the arguments can change that mind. Because if we all
agreed, then we didn't need to have much more of a
conversation. So there are a number much people who may be
undecided but we certainly have some brave souls who feel it is
not a good idea. So you might now want to think about your
questions and your statements to see if you can convince any of
those people to not put their hand up and make a rationale at
the end of this.

Page 53 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

Now, Alice you're the lead, are you not, for GAC for this topic?
Can I get a microphone to Alice, number 4, please? Because
rather than hear from me, if we could just have a little a
rationale on why I assume you think it is a good idea to promote
to underdeveloped.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much. Alice Munyua here. I'm co-chair of the
underserved GAC working group. I haven't really gotten myself
on speed with this Cross-Community Working Group, but one -there are several issues. And I think we've articulated them in
various GAC documents, starting all the way from the GAC
scorecard that had very specific recommendations regarding the
need for support for underserved regions, both in terms of
capacity building, in terms of financial support, in terms of just
reviewing some of the requirements for registrars to be able to
apply to -- apply for new gTLDs. And now from the experience
we've seen with the last -- the last one, I think we had 1,900 and
only 17 came from developing countries. And then out of those,
I think in the Africa region, only three have been delegated.
Three. One of them, which is quite infamous, is caught up in an
issue that is quite mind boggling, and I'm not going to get into
that discussion, but I think it's an important discussion to get
into in terms of how we develop the framework for the next

Page 54 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

round because it's extremely important that this does not
happen again.
Some of the challenges I think have already been experienced by
a number of the registrars that operate in some of the
underserved regions, and so we have those quite clear. So I
think what I'll do is refer you all to some of the GAC documents
that have already been developed on this issue. Thank you.

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

Fantastic. Thank you.
So you've heard some of the yea argument, and if you agree with
that yea argument, you don't need to put your hand up and just
say, "Me, too." But now I would like to find out from the
audience is there some other view or some specific comments
that someone would like to make. Make yourself known. We
will come to the noes in a moment.
Back in the back, please. Can I have number 3 over there,
please. Because this isn't hearing about the work group. It's
about hearing your views to help us do our work.

DONNA AUSTIN:

Page 55 of 69

Thanks, Cheryl. Donna Austin from NeuStar.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

I'm curious as to understand what we mean by promote
applications from underserved regions, because, you know, if
you're talking about a campaign that, you know, gets to the
underserved regions to say this is a new gTLD program, we think
there's some value in you applying for this TLD because it can do
XYZ, that's one thing.
If you're talking about an assumption that applications from
underserved regions is going to do those things for you, I think
that's the wrong assumption.

And I think we've proved --

certainly there's a lot of work that has been done in the Middle
East to establish infrastructure or a support network that can
assist underserved regions in improving access to the skills,
information, whatever they need to kind of support a domain
name -- the domain name industry in that area.
So I think I'd like a little bit more explanation about what you
mean by promoting applications from underserved regions
because this is really complex. It's not -- Having a TLD isn't going
to fix all the problems that are in that region. So I would like to
understand what we mean by that before we get too carried
away by the idea.
Thanks.

Page 56 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

EN

If I may, of course. This is a piece of work that's coming up next
and part of the conversation will be to explore exactly that. But
just to put a little bit of thought process and get some of the
juices going for you to all think about this, for example, we had
the Applicant Support Program that was exercised at the end,
very late in the process, last time. Now, I'm not suggesting we
discuss the relative merits or successes or failures of that, but
that's an example of what may be seen as something to be
pursued or may not. But we need to think about consequences
including of those sorts of programs.
Who have we got next, Avri?

AVRI DORIA:

I don't know, but we're almost out of time. So if we can get one
of the people that objected to the notion of serving -- The first
hand I saw was number 2 there. So, please.

LORI SCHULMAN:

Yes, this is Lori Schulman, for the record. I'm speaking in purely
a personal capacity, but my statement of interest is I'm with the
IPC and I represent the International Trademark Association.
But again, I'm speaking in a personal capacity.

Page 57 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

I have a real problem with that generalized statement because
the new gTLD program has had a lot of stumbling blocks.
There's been a lot of failures.
We would be marketing a program that is very expensive to get
into, and I have a real problem marketing something without
understanding how to monetize and make the business work.
So until we can provide technical support or get some pool of
expertise, I do not want to see any developing nation invest
what it takes to get a name that may or may not be delegated;
again, for the reasons we stated about the problems with the
community applications.

CHERYL LANGDON ORR:

So not setting up for failure would be a very wise thing, I take it.

AVRI DORIA:

At this point, with only 13 minutes left to the session, I'd really
like to at least get the other people that we've invited up here to
speak their piece. Although I really like the fact that we had a
conversation, and afterwards I'm going to say an hour and a half
for these sessions is probably inadequate.

Page 58 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

The next one I had, though, was geographic names and other
names of public interest.

Susan, if you could give us the

introduction to that theme.

SUSAN PAYNE:

Yeah. Thank you. So my a name Susan Payne. I'm a member of
the PDP working group. I'm coming from the GNSO, and my job
is to just really introduce the subject and throw it open to you; in
particular, in relation related to country and territory names and
country codes. I'm talking here about the second level. We
already dealt with the top level when Heather was speaking, so
this is particularly around the names at the second level.
And we know that the Registry Agreement represents what the
current position is in the current policy where if it's a country or
territory name, it requires the agreement of the relevant
government and the approval of ICANN. There have been a few
countries who have said actually, We're fine, we have given
blanket approval and a number who perhaps have said, Okay,
we're fine with some approval, maybe brand TLDs but not for
everyone.
So country names, there's a particular treatment of those in
relation to the two-letter country codes.

The treatment is

slightly different, although there is a similarity to it. There is two
different ways in which the names might be released for use, but

Page 59 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

with the general principle in both of these cases being that the
names of reserved from being used. So if you want to use them,
you either need the agreement of the relevant government and
the country code manager or you implement measures to avoid
confusion with the relevant corresponding country code and
ICANN agrees to those measures.
And, again, we already know -- I mean, those of us who have
been dealing in this area, there is a process going through at the
moment dealing with how do we address the confusion point.
But I want to throw it open to people for their views and really to
go back to the basics of these are obviously non-exhaustive
questions. But, you know, really what are we protecting here?
And why are we protecting country names and the two-letter
codes? I'm assuming that the answer from some of the people
who feel they need protecting is it's to avoid confusion. But if
you think it's for a different reason, please, you know, let us have
your views.
And if it is to avoid confusion, then what is this confusion? And,
particularly, if we think about some examples, you know,
spain.movie, sorry, just to take an example, what's confusing
about spain.movie or it.korea or my.bbc? What is the confusion?
What are we trying to protect? And think about is the confusion - or is the protection needed across the board, or does it depend

Page 60 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

on the type of TLD, the actual string? Is it the particular string
that's the issue, or is it a particular type of TLD needs certain
treatment and a different type of TLD such as a brand needs
different treatment? And is it relevant what use is being made?
So we heard yesterday from the Netherlands GAC representative
who said de.nl is in use in his country, and it is the brand site for
Douwe Egberts, which is a coffee company. It's not Germany.
And he thinks in his case there was no confusion with that.
So in that kind of situation, where is the concern? And this is me
stopping now and throwing it open to everyone else.

AVRI DORIA:

Thank you. But what I'm going to do is actually ask one more
person to give their introduction, which is on safeguards and
public interest commitments. And then we'll basically open up
the rest of the time to discussion on the two. And we'll have to
serve brands and stuff up next day. We only have six minutes
left.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you, Avri. I thought you were going to let me start talking
after the session opened and after the bar was open. So thank
you for giving me the four minutes.

Page 61 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

AVRI DORIA: You've got two minutes.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you for giving me the two minutes.
The story is relatively simple. In the GAC's Beijing communique,
they identified about 45 strings that they believed needed
specific safeguards because they were associated with highly
regulated industries or activities in most countries.
They requested eight specific safeguards on those TLDs. The
board implemented six of them, did not implement two of them,
at least did not fully implement two of them specifically related
to verification and validation of credentials.
The ALAC strongly supported that type of activity, although we
were not 100% supportive of the very specifics. But we have
been working together with the GAC for quite a long time now
and also parts of the business constituency.
The real issue is that we believe that some of those TLDs, some
of those strings, if they have no protections whatsoever, there is
potential for consumer harm. Some of those TLDs -- and .BANK
is one of the examples -- voluntarily built -- voluntarily does

Page 62 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

verify and validate credentials. And they built a business model
around that, that included the cost of doing that.
Other TLDs, a significant number of the 40-odd strings, also did
some level of validation or verification. Some do not. The real
problem at this point is going forward in answering question: Do
we need some level of verification validation of those types of
TLDs in a future round or however we release them? And it's a
difficult problem.
We may in the near future have some statistics for the TLDs that
did not do any verification. Are we finding examples of harm?
That's something we might be able to measure, although the
uptake of some of these TLDs is slow enough that it may be
difficult.
The real challenge is on the TLDs, on the registries that did
implement some sort of verification or validation or control. You
can't measure the potential harm that would have happened if
they hadn't. And, yet, we may go into issuance of future TLDs
without a requirement to do any verification validation. And,
therefore, again, we're in a situation where we then have to wait
patiently for a few years and see if there's a lot of harm.
So we are hoping that through either the AoC review or the gTLD
PDP that somehow we evaluate the ones that we know about
now, the ones that were identified by the GAC, decide which

Page 63 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

ones were just overreach and we shouldn't have included them
in the list, and also look at ones to see whether there is, indeed,
a reason that we might want to protect certain strings. And then
we need a process for deciding how to protect them and a
predictable process so people can apply for these TLDs and not
find out after the fact that they have a huge cost associated with
running these TLDs which they didn't know about when they
built their business model. Thank you.

AVRI DORIA:

Thanks. We've got five minutes left. I'd like to open it up to
another question or two, if we can get them in the moments.
So I have one in the front here.

Number 2.

And, please,

introduce yourself and keep the question short. And then one
back then.

SPAIN:

Thank you. My name is Gema Campillos. I come from Spain. I'm
GAC representative for that country.
It's not a question. It's a reply to the question raised by the lady.
I don't know her name. Susan.
You asked about the reasons why there is a protection in the
Applicant Guidebook for two-letter codes and also for country

Page 64 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

EN

names. You're right, it's one of the reasons that it's confusion,
but I cannot, of course -- I cannot give an interpretation of the
intentions of the community when they wrote the Applicant
Guidebook, but I can tell you about other possible reasons. One
of them being that they are identifiers for countries for the
people that live in those countries, and a good number of
governments think that they should have the right to decide
what use those identifiers should be given. This is one reason.
Another one could relate to their use in relationship with certain
TLDs. There are some sensitive TLDs related to religion, related
to sexual behavior. In some countries they have laws that forbid
certain behaviors. And they would not like to see the country
code or the name of the country under those TLDs. And there
are other countries feel that if they see the country code or the
name of the country under the name of another geo name,
especially if it's a city or a region, they can be -- use the kind of
thing that it's a province of that country and not a country of its
own. So these are more or less the reasons that countries have
expressed in their comments for their reasons. Thank you.

AVRI DORIA:

Page 65 of 69

Thank you. Got number 5. Yeah.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

NICOLA TRELOAR:

EN

Thank you. Nicola Treloar from the New Zealand government.
Just also answering the question on what the issues may be with
the use of country codes. For us it's both the string and its use.
We don't think we have an exclusive right to the use of these two
letters in a combination.

We don't think we're the only

stakeholder that may have an interest in using our country
name. But our concern is when there is confusion with the
country code or in the case of a small number of countries like
New Zealand who use the two-letter code as a short name for
their country are confusion with the government website. So we
see confusion, and the only place that we've objected really,
Army, Navy, and Air Force domain names. This is a moderated
domain within .NZ so there's a possibility of confusion with the
.NZ third level -- I'm sorry, top level and there's also a possibility
of confusion with the government because we actually use the
term "NZ Army" to refer to our Army.
However, we do know that there are some uses for this country
code with these domains that may not be risking for confusion.
They may be uses for history of the New Zealand Army. There
may be uses for the Army itself. They may want to have access
to it. So our concern is that when we talk about mitigation
measures we do look at things that will adequately address the
specific risk for the specific string and how it's being used.

Page 66 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Thank you. At this point -- okay. We'll get one -- there was -- I
mean, basically we've got two minutes left and I have one more
slide to put up, so if -- Kavouss, if you can give us a quick -- and
can you put up slide 24, please? I don't have time for them.
Okay.

IRAN:

Yes. I want to emphasize -- Kavouss Arestah from Iran. I want to
emphasize what Gema says. There are gTLDs which is -- or TLDs,
sorry, that are very sensitive in one sense or another. She gave
two examples. There might be other examples. Some countries
their national law legislation does not allow that the country
name be associated with those sensitive in one way or the other.
So you cannot ignore the national law and the national
legislations. This is one point.
The other point is resale.

You have given, Susan, a good

example. Hema gave a sensitive example of that. That is very
important.

And then you refer to the agreement.

What's

agreement constitute? If somebody does not reply within 60
days, does it mean it's agreed? No, it does not agree because
has no manpower to do the reply. So we should really seriously
think of this sensitivity religiously or in other way around. This is
very, very important. Thank you.

Page 67 of 69

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

AVRI DORIA:

EN

Thank you. And with apologies to everyone that didn't get to
speak, we've hit the hour.

We have two more meetings

tomorrow. They're displayed up there. And one thing we've
shown is we've got a lot of complex issues to talk about and we
need a lot more time to talk about them. So please participate.
What, you had a very quick thing, you really needed to say?
Please, go ahead.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Merci, madam. Thank you very much, madam. I'm sorry for
going back to the same topic. I will be very brief in my comment,
30 seconds. When it comes to geo names and country codes, I
would like to say the following: I would like to go back to
.AFRICA which is something that is worrying us.
There was a problem with .AFRICA. We sent lists from all African
countries and we presented it in an official manner. And after
that registries told us that there was a very high fee to pay. So
there is this difficulty in terms of pricing.
And secondly, we were told that for the arbitration of .AFRICA
the jurisdiction to apply was the California jurisdiction. And in
this sense this was a second difficulty.

AVRI DORIA:

Page 68 of 69

Thank you.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: New gTLD Subsequent Procedures

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 69 of 69

EN

