ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO Non Commercial Users Constituency NCUC
Wednesday, 29 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

Rafik Dammak:

Good morning and thanks for coming today. I know that our session is
clashing with the GAC and GNSO council. Say it's complicated to explain, but
it's really beyond our capacity.
So we hope that for today we kind of - because there is a new format to
discuss. Kind of our impression and what we are seeing in this meeting and
hopefully so we can be on some follow-up action. So it's more really as a
discussion just to summarize our thoughts -- what's our impression and so
on.
We are not discussing about specific topics, so we can bring any issues that
we have in mind. But first maybe if we can do it quickly, really, really short
introduction kind of Dr. (Talbot). And starting with Tatyana on the right -really short.

Tatiana Tropina: Hi. Tatiana Tropina, so basically to (unintelligible).
Monika Zalnieriute:

Hi (Unintelligible).

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 2

Tapani Tarvainen: There are not so many (unintelligible), so no worry.
Sam Lanfranco:

Sam Lanfranco, observer in part.

Gangesh Varma: Hi. (Unintelligible) from the Center for Communication Governance at the
(National) (unintelligible).
George Sadowsky:

George Sadowsky, ICANN Board.

Tapani Travaien: (Unintelligible). NCSG chair.
Stefania Milan:

(Unintelligible) University (unintelligible) and GNSO councillor.

David Cake:

David Cake, Electronic Frontiers Australia and GNSO council.

Ayden Férdeline: (Unintelligible) and I'm working out of university and also early active member
of (unintelligible).
Man:

This is (unintelligible) from (Communication University of China).
(Unintelligible) which has 75% of similarity of (NCUC). Thank you.

Peter Green:

Hello everyone. I'm (unintelligible). Also (unintelligible) from Peking, China.

Stephanie Perrin: Stephanie Perrin. I'm from Canada and I'm a university student.
Man:

Hi everyone. This is (unintelligible) based in the UK.

Carlos Raul Guttierez:
Man:

(Unintelligible) from Costa Rica and GNSO council.

(Unintelligible). I'm from the (BC) and I'll be leaving in a second as soon as I
finish these Emails. I have to go in this thing with the GAC and the GNSO,
but thank you for your hospitality.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 3

Matthew Shears: I'm (unintelligible) with the Center for Democracy and Technology.
(Jonas Mufund): I'm (Jonas Mufund) and (unintelligible) at the University of (unintelligible).
(Daniel West):
(Rebecah Corfor):

Hi. (Daniel West), University of Oxford, also an (exempt).
I'm (Rebecah Corfor) and from the University of (unintelligible) in the UK
and I'm an (unintelligible) (Ambassador).

Raoul Plommer:

Hi, my name is Raoul Plommer and I'm working for the Electronic Frontiers
Finland.

(Lyn Rumpal):

(Lyn Rumpal) and also from Electronic Frontiers Finland.

Rafik Dammak:

Thanks and we have maybe two - just introduce yourselves.

(Rachel Porak):

Hi, I'm (Rachel Porak). I'm also at the University of Oxford and (unintelligible).

Shane Kerr:

I'm Shane Kerr, Beijing Internet Institute.

Rafik Dammak:

Okay, thanks. And I'm the Chair of the NCUC. So let's just start then. Okay.
Since the - I think most of our counselors are in the - I think in the GAC,
maybe - or the GAC meeting is going to start - let's maybe get some thoughts
or kind of briefings - I mean from Stephanie or (Stephania) and David -- a
(forward) the kind of the main topics or issues that were discussed within the
GNSO council -- and also for tomorrow meeting -- the public meeting.

David Cake:

Well, one of the things we discussed at the meeting - I'm not going to do all of
this, so - yes, but one of the things we discussed a lot at the meeting on
Monday was we talked a lot about the interaction - we had a very productive
meeting with the board where we talked a bit about the interaction between
the GAC and the GNSO.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 4

And there are a number of issues -- some of which have actually been sort of
hanging around for years -- others which are still very active. So there's - to
do with - particularly with how the GNSO PDPs on things that are to do with
inter-governmental or government (bad) sort of organizations in which there
has been GAC advice that disagrees with the GNSO PDPs -- and how the
board fits into that.
So I think this is one of these things that we've sort of - we, you know, the
board sort of neglected some of these issues because they've been a bit
distracted with other things. So the - one of them is literally been hanging
around for a couple of years like the GAC and the GNSO have given the
board by competing device -- basically or (different) competing - differing
interpretations of what we've basically do.
And the board has just sort of sat on it going, "We're not going to sort it out,
but, you know." To do with handling of names related to the Red Cross -- has
hung around for many years.
One that's looming is how we deal with (curative) rights -- that is rights after
the domain has already been delegated -- to do with inter-governmental
organizations and international inter-governmental organizations -- and nongovernmental organizations and so on.
So - and that is all leading up to the GAC and GNSO discussion going on
next-door. The counselor should probably really be in that. And that whole
discussion has been quite a bit how the GAC deals with - how the board
deals with competing advice -- and the GAC has been something we've
discussed quite a bit this week. And that a couple of things in particular with
working groups that (Sylvia) is now working out chairs.
((Crosstalk))

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 5

David Cake:

Yes, you've been - yes, talked about the actual GAC GNSO interaction -- yes.
That's - so that's been something the council's talked out about, certainly.

Woman:

Just a (complement) and probably not as interesting as what they just shared.
Of course we talked about the (unintelligible) that are on the table now. So
the (actual) mechanism -- the next generation of registries that actually
services -- so the new (unintelligible).
And then also of course the new gTLDs -- subsequent procedures. And
above all that, there's also the big issue of the GNSO review, so what
happens to the GNSO, therefore, to this community? Looking forward with
the results of the CCWG -- (our council will be listening). So that's something
that we'll start to vote on in the coming - I mean tomorrow for the GNSO
public meeting.
And there's also one of the mysterious meeting in the future of the GNSO. To
date 1:30 would probably be - going to be discussed further. Mysterious
because a conflict's not in the official schedule.

Stephanie Perrin: Stephanie Perrin for the record. I think it's worth highlighting that we had a
pretty useful exchange with the board on this whole subject of how they treat
the GAC advice. And definitely, you know, the GNSO has been doing this
experiment of having a GAC liaison to basically ferry our concerns back and
forth.
And we have this early look where we, you know, flag issues where there
could be, you know, GAC concerns. But I still find it stunning how the GAC
actually functions as a governmental group of individuals. It's unaccountable
in my view. And this really -- particularly on something as contentious as the
upcoming five-year RDS -- I call it (22), but what is it -- the new gTLD registry
data services (office) -- PDP?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 6

If we work for five years, saw off all of these contentious issues and then the
GAC comes in and says, "You didn't listen to our advice. It's not going to
pretty, you know." And unfortunately I think it really will undermine the multistakeholder process because no one in their right mind is going to give a
huge chunk of their lives to this if then the policy process is diverted or
overturned.
And we do have a nice compromise that appears to be coming on the privacy
proxy services which was a difficult year and a half PDP. But we got
agreement and the contentious issue is whether or not Web sites that doing
financial transactions can be registered using privacy proxy services. And it's
a long complicated story that we don't have time for, but we got an
agreement to mend. The GAC has said, "Well, you didn't listen to our advice."
Well, it's a big long complicated process that they don't choose to engage in
and they -- I would bet -- don't understand the issues. Because I beg to
suggest I do on some of these issues. So it's very frustrating. Anyway,
thanks.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Stephanie. After you, we have Carlos and then Stephanie. Yes,
Carlos.

Carlos Raul Gutierrez:

Thank you. This is Carlos for the record. Stephanie, I beg you to

watch the - your negative commands over the last two days. It's not an
experiment. The inter process started in 2013. We got sort of first time our
working group with the GNSO and the GAC -- 2014 it was formalized.
We developed a light (unintelligible) for quick look mechanism. We have
already used the quick look mechanism in all outstanding PDPs. And we
recently formalized or made permanent a role of the liaison between the GAC
and the GNSO.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 7

So I really hope that all the - and you heard (Janet) and (Robinson) on
Monday or Tuesday mentioning that. You and I -- we have both worked for
governments. I have worked for my government in the GAC and I have to
disagree with your negative perspectives.
It's our responsibility to make a better relationship with GAC with all these
efforts that we are doing -- and in each PDP. Thank you.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay, thanks Carlos. Stephanie.

Stephanie Perrin: (Unintelligible). Anyway I wanted - this is Stephanie (unintelligible) for the
record. So (unintelligible) Stephanie has a question about this mysterious
meeting in the afternoon. There is nothing really mysterious, except that for
some reason it failed to make the public agenda.
Basically a follow-up on the decision in Los Angeles this year why the NCPH
decided to start the group to look into possible changes in GNSO in the
future. Team made of (Rudy Vansnick) and Tony Holmes have been doing
their (unintelligible) (costs) for feedback ideas, suggestions.
And the main point here is to present the outcome of that, the summary of the
feedback and discuss possible follow-up. And it will be at 1:30 local time and
run (unintelligible). So anybody (unintelligible) can make, please come.
Thanks.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Stephanie. Matt?

Matthew Shears Yes, thanks. Actually Tapani covered the issue, but I would like to say that
this meeting is important. And I do, like Tapani encourage people to attend
because it really is about how do we define structure and look at the future of
the GNSO. And it covers a number of issues.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 8

Some of us have responded, but the responses that they received to initial
questions or what's - (you're) limited. And what they'll be doing today is
revealing a summary of what those responses were.
So I think there's an opportunity to raise additional comments and concerns -and about the future of the GNSO. And then I think it will be a - should be a
pretty rigorous discussion, so I encourage everyone to attend. Thanks.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Matt. Maybe before the newcomer here, just to clarify what you are
thinking about is that even in within GNSO we discuss a lot about -- we
should -- we must talk about policy's development.
There is also talk about structure of the GNSO and how it operates and so on
because at the end we have different groups within with different interests.
And because of - we had in last year I think a review process that's
happened.
And we're not really set - it was not really set aside as outcome. And because
of the (unintelligible) accountability process, the (INSO) (unintelligible)
process. And there is a lot - there are a lot of discussions -- what's the future
of this structure how we -- maybe we'll -- about all the groups.
So it's known, but that's why people are trying to discuss about this -- just to
clarify. So we do sometimes discuss too much time to talk about structure
and not about policy, but it's because it's - I mean in this model how you can
get something that works for everyone or make everyone happy.
So that's the problem. Okay, just I'm trying to clarify because also we - as we
have several acronyms like the NCPH -- that's the Non Contracted Party
House where the (MCIC) and (unintelligible) is. Okay.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 9

We discussed more - yes, Stephanie, just the ones -- so that we discussed
one about the GNSO, but I guess maybe if we can go to working groups and
the policy. Let's say I'm just maybe to get some insight. (Unintelligible).
Stephanie Perrin: Never mind, if you want to go on working groups, I've - I was just going to
respond to Carlos. I didn't mean to be disrespectful about the GAC liaison
quick look or to imply that it was an experiment Carlos.
It's - it seems to be working. And this is an improvement, you know, and fine.
However, it's not yielding the kind of results we need fast enough for some of
these PDPs I would suggest -- and the RDS is one of them
So we need it to work better and we need to have some kind of confidence
that things are not going to unravel. I - for instance -- the compromise that we
are reaching on the PPSAI is that the issues the GAC raised will be looked at
in implementation.
Policy can't be set in implementation groups. The policy they're looking for
cannot be retrofitted in the implementation group. It's going to force us as the
civil society reps to join the implementation group to make sure that doesn't
happen.
I spent quite a bit of quality time on the excellent group that Chuck Gomes
and I'm going to skip the other co-chair led on the difference between policy
and implementation -- and how we do the triggers when we're moving
between policy and implementation. How it goes back to the GNSO for policy
clarification.
I would hate to think that we are going to still try and fix things where people
aren't happy in implementation. So I'm saying we haven't made great strides
in terms of our relationship with the GAC. It's just we're not there yet -- we still
have a lot of work to do. Thanks.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 10

Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Stephanie, that's - it's a still work in progress.

Stephanie Perrin: Sorry?
Rafik Dammak:

Still work in progress. Let's - okay.

Stephanie Perrin: Need help.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay, so yes, I mean that's important thing within - I mean how we can
improve - I mean for this - the relation between GNSO and the GAC. And
how we can get the GAC to be involved with - from the beginning and the
policy development process -- and not a (bend) when almost has done and
then they keep rising new issues.
Okay. So maybe before going to - yes? Okay. So maybe before going to the discuss about the PDP, soon as I see that (Nathan) is here and he was in a
meeting for the GAC human rights and international working group -- if he
can give us some insights and updates on those about cross-community
working party in human rights and I forget the rest.
So can you give us some updates (unintelligible)?

Niels ten Oever:

I would love to. Thank you for the opportunity, Rafik. So I will very quickly go
through the work that has been going on since the last time we met.
And we can say that there is quite a spur of activity notably after the bylaw
(text) (unintelligible) adopted -- which actually created the commitments for
ICANN to respect human rights.
But this will only become active once we've developed the framework of
interpretation in Work Stream 2. And that was a process that we just started
last Sunday.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 11

In the cross-community working party on ICANN's corporate and social
responsibility to respect human rights, we have been designing our work up
in three parts. One part has been doing research. One part of the research
that has been published is research on the (delete) of fiduciary which is also
leading that sub-group. Oh, exactly -- on jurisdiction.
Then there is the sub-group that's following the work in Work Stream 2 that
has created a visualization on what are all the rights that are impacted by
ICANN. You can find that visualization at icannhumanrights.net.
And then there is a sub-group that has been monitoring the ongoing PDPs
and understanding the human rights impact on that. So that's what we have
been doing. It seems like the design team will go ahead with forming the
framework for interpretation.
We will have a short coordination meeting after this meeting at 10:30 -- we
will meet in front of Room Number 10 that's downstairs from here. And if you
have any questions, I'm more than able and willing to answer them.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay, thanks (unintelligible), that was concise. Maybe take this (unintelligible) is here for any newcomer on the (NCSC) member to ask
question. I'm looking at the next gen, but anyone please feel free to ask
question if you want more clarification. And yes, Stephanie.

Stephanie Perrin: Stephanie Perrin for the record. I think maybe for the benefit of newcomers,
do they understand the difference between a PDP, a policy development
process -- and the working part of the cross-community working party?
Because they're quite different and you might want to explain that from a
process perspective. Thanks.
Niels ten Oever:

Yes, so what Stephanie is alluding to is that in PDPs, we are actually creating
policies and the CCWG is just the customer's working party -- just a happy
informal coordination body where we come together and do as we want?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 12

And that is to support the work of others and to coordinate and understand
the problem of how human rights and ICANN interrelate and impact each
other. So it's more of trying to understand where all (trends) come together
and inform the discussions in other parts.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay thanks (unintelligible). Maybe if you want, you can share document yes. So if anyone wants to join the working party could have a new comment.
Good opportunity to get involved with the discussion. Yes Niels.

Niels ten Oever:

So do you work with other (constituencies)? Niels.

Niels ten Oever:

Yes everyone is welcome in the - in our party.

Niels ten Oever:

So do you have people from - do you know how many people you have from
a different (constituency) other than…

Niels ten Oever:

Yes, so we are a rather diverse group. We have people from the technical
community, so we have people from (unintelligible) (Internet Exchange). We
have people from (IRRs). We have business peoples -- we try as human
rights to be as diverse as possible.

Rafik Dammak:

Okay any question or clarification? Okay I think it's not that too early guys.
Oh, yes please.

Woman:

I have - yes question for clarification. This is my first ICANN meeting, so
excuse the ignorance on this. I understand that there is a working group on
human rights that has already - or a working party already in existence -- and
then now like part of a cross-community accountability working group.
There's one of the streams is looking at human rights. Is that correct? And
then just a few minutes ago there was a GAC session on human rights and

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 13

international law. Could you clarify what are the differences between these
various groups looking at human rights? Thanks.
Niels ten Oever:

I - it's almost like we've practiced this. This is great. So this way I can seem
like I'm not trying to capture the mic, but I can still talk a lot. It's great. No it's so there is - there's a lot - there are a lot of different things ongoing as you
said.
So there - the discussion on human rights is happening as part of the
transition where we manage to get a - an addition to the bylaws where we
have the commitment. But now we need to come up with a framework
interpretation to make it really clear what that bylaw means.
So that's the work in the cross-community working group on accountability.
But that was not always clear that it would happen, and to map where and to
offer some preparatory work because in the CCWG there is a lot of space for
negotiating and working things out, but in the (CCWP) we're really trying do a
more of a mapping and a research and understanding exercise.
And also to understand the work that other great people doing are in the
trenches of the PDPs where they are also possibly human rights implications.
So just to have that central point of coordination and being a bit of a center of
support or a knowledge center is something that we have this informal body
that is a cross-community working party.

Rafik Dammak:

Yes Stephanie.

Stephanie Perrin: So (unintelligible), you mentioned that you have a group - sub-group on
jurisdiction. You had - do you have any plans to contribute to the Work
Stream 2 accountable (team) that jurisdiction sub-group?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 14

Niels ten Oever:

I would like to hand that question off to a fiduciary who is I think doing the
jurisdiction work. I will myself in the CCWG working to be focusing on human
rights and diversity.

Stephanie Perrin: Hi, sorry, could use a piece of (unintelligible). I am just asking if you're
planning to contribute to the jurisdiction in Work Stream 2.
Woman:

Yes, so the way that the cross-community working party is structured is that
look at what is most important. So for example right now, we're focusing on
PDPs that we (unintelligible) most important. For example (unintelligible) who,
you know, has a very good idea of the most important things -- give us an
idea of what they should do and we're going ahead with that.
With Work Stream 2, we will be looking at each of the specific topics and
working on human rights with respect to that. Does that answer your
question?

Stephanie Perrin: Definitely. Thank you.
Woman:

Yes.

Rafik Dammak:

Okay I think that's good. Okay, Niels do you want to discuss more or more
further than the human rights issue? Okay, well let's move to policy
development process. I mean working groups -- and maybe we can - yes?

Niels ten Oever:

Yes, sorry there's one thing I forgot and it's maybe because I've been a bit
close to the issue. But there has been a very interesting report coming out
about the UN - UN (Special) (unintelligible) on freedom of expression who
has just launched his report on the private sector in the digital age.
And he did quite elaborately maps different parts of the private sector and
Internal critical infrastructure that actually impacts human rights. And he also
mentions ICANN there, so it's - the - we are not the only ones that are looking

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 15

at this problem and it's also coming from other sites. I think it's really good
that we're going ahead and developing this and ICANN really recommends
the report by (David Kay) as well.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay thanks for the information. So I'd say let's maybe move on to talk about
policy development process and so working groups. And then maybe
Stephanie wants to talk about RDS employees.

Stephanie Perrin: Yes now how many people have already heard so much about RDS and
Whois that they don't want to hear it again? Okay. I'll ignore (James) here.
For the newcomers, I highly recommend that if you're interested in a working
group that touches on one of the big issues that civil society has been fighting
on at ICANN for probably 16 years. And I won't say there's no end in sight, I
think we - this is a very serious PDP -- we're finally getting down to grasp the
metal and get ahold of the really difficult issues -- and look at everything.
It's certainly an exhaustive process. But the - from - I'll just give you the civil
society perspective. Niels has explained about this sort of a human rights
lens that we are applying to the entire organization -- and its procedures and
practices and PDPs.
Certainly the RDS -- we are concerned about the exposure. First of all, the
excessive collection, use and attention of personal information mostly, but
also confidential information of groups and non-individuals as per the Data
Protection Act -- because the confidentiality of journalists and human rights
workers.
And women's educators and, you know, all of these sensitive groups that are
often tracked down and harassed -- or even killed concerns us just as much
as the protection of personal information that would covered under Data
Protection law and constitutional rights.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 16

So that's what we're concerned about really in the Whois and the Directory
continues to grow over the years. When ICANN was first initiated, part of the
original (re-mix) from the US Department of Commerce included the retention
of registered data. And the requirements to make it available mostly for
intellectual property enforcement -- and that has grown over the years.
But I'll spare you the long history of how that came about. The problem is of
course the domain industry has mushroomed and the list of data elements
that they want has grown. And the layers of infrastructure through which all of
this data is traveling and being held has also grown -- increasing the risk for
everybody.
And the data is available to valued added service providers who are mining it
and analyzing and reselling it and repackaging it. So that's kind of it in a
nutshell. Can you put the Jeanie back in the bottle -- can you reduce the
number of data elements? Can you reduce the risk to the data subjects?
Can you stop the illegal data retention and I'm saying illegal in the sense of
the European countries? Because the Data Protection Commissioners and
the European Data Protection Supervisors have been writing for all these
years saying this is - this needs to be done -- that's illegal, etcetera, with very
little impact.
So that's what I'm writing my PhD. Dissertation on so I can bore you for hours
on it -- and I'll stop now. Please join the group -- it's a great way of getting
introduced to some of the fundamental issues at ICANN -- and it's very
complex, so you will see the registrars in the group will explain how this all
works from a technical perspective.
It's a very multi-disciplinary committee. The intellectual property folks are
there. I'm not suggesting they don't have legitimate interests, but the question
really from a public policy perspective is if ICANN is doing this as a multistakeholder organization, what's the (remit) - what is their public policy remit?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 17

You know, this is not like the ITU. How is that set, what do they have the
authority to do? And is indeed the application of international law really more
or less out the window here?
Privacy scholars have written on this and I see we've two folks from
University of (Oslo) down there who probably know (Lee Byway) who's
written on this whole - a very interesting book on international regulation by
contract. I'm sorry, I just got the glare from (James). I'm going - I promised I
wouldn't bore you to death, so I'm about to bore you death, but yes -- look at
(Lee Byway's) book -- I wish he would come and join our group. Thanks.
Rafik Dammak:

I was reminded to remind if you put the (unintelligible) their name when
they're speaking.

Shane Kerr:

Okay, hi. This is Shane Kerr. So I don't disagree with anything you say and
I'm just starting to join this working group. However, it seems like the actual
work that's going on is on the other side of galaxy of what you're actually
describing.
And it seems like the chairs were took under advisement -- the idea of
questioning the fundamental goals of the group. And then kind of said,
"Great, you go guys go work on that and we're going to continue on with this
process which is underway and cannot be stopped by any force."
So is this - this is really my first experience with this. Is this something that's
actually going to be discussed or is this something that's just going to
continue on because that's the process says is going to happen?

James Gannon:

Okay, so yes and no. You definitely have a point and so our charter.

Shane Kerr:

Who are you?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 18

James Gannon:

Sorry, James Gannon. And it's a complicated question, and so yes, our
charter currently sets out the method and work plan in particularly for RDS an
insane amount of detail. And due to the (unintelligible) large scale of what
RDS is and the serious impact that it will literally have on the Internet, you
know, there were working groups who work out how to run this working
group.
Now as we started and I want to just give some kind of fairness to the chairs - they are following the work plan that is in the charter. But as, you know,
yourself and myself and a number of others have seen, it's not really going
very well. We've ended up doing things and what has turned out to be
possibly slightly round about backwards, you know, not the most efficient
manner.
So I think what we saw at the meeting yesterday that you were there and
others were there as well -- is that we are now at the stage where the
discussion about possibly reopening the charter is now -- it's not fully on the
table, but we're - we've said we're going to have this little parallel track just for
a little while that can look at -- well, do we really need to?
Can we work with what we have in the charter at the moment and tweak that
without having to reopen the charter because reopening a PDP charter is a
pretty big deal -- particularly because this is a board-initiated PDP. Or do we,
you know, have to say, "Now look, this isn't going to work" and go through
that whole process.
So there is a reason why it is so complex. There is a reason that the Chairs
may seem like they're kind of trying to railroad us. But they're railroading it
within their confines of the charter unfortunately.

Stephanie Perrin: Stephanie Perrin for the record. I think what you're seeing is the triumph of
process over reason and that's my personal opinion. We tried - it's a very
difficult problem figuring out how to tackle this. But as somebody who's been

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 19

on standards committees if you don't set your definitions at the beginning,
you get lost pretty quickly because you're fighting about definitions when
you've done half the work.
And when it comes to Whois, the SSAC has been doing exactly what the
Data Protection Commissioners have been doing, and that is asking what's
the purpose of collecting registration data. Is that the ((Foreign Language
Spoken)) as we stay in Canada, you know; it's basic. And yet we're not
asking that question until later.
So from my perspective, that's like a standards group meeting to come up
with a process without defining the terms and deciding, "Okay, we'll define
the terms half way through after we've got it half written."
I don't think it's being done out of -- what's the word -- bad faith; I think there's
a hope that we can get all the arcs (sic) on the table.
But from our perspective -- what we're looking at on the table that's being
called to requirements when there's 999 of them as you say -- there are uses
for the data before we ask the question of okay, we've got a customer here,
an end user -- a citizen who has rights arguably and participating on the
Internet -- and that's not been defined and agreed.
It's not agreed that an individual has a right to a domain name, you know, so
interact on the Internet. So that's a really big other question that hasn't been
defined and answered.
But - so it's kind of as if, well, we would like to get all this data. Well, you're
not allowed to do that in any other service whether it's banking or telecom or
you name it; plumbing. You're not allowed to collect more data than you
need.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 20

The question is do we actually need all this data first? What are we entitled to
collect; not what could we possibly sell this data for, monetize it for, et cetera.
And we're very worried about this whole process. At least I am, and I think
some of us are.
Shane Kerr:

So this is Shane again. So I guess the question what's going to happen next
is - I mean I agree with all of this. I think the whole foundation around the
Whois, it's definitely seems like people have identified problems and decided
we're going to cure the symptoms.
I mean to be honest, if I was a working group chair, I would say, "Wow, let's
stop the work. Let's go back and recharter." But is that possible? Is that likely
to happen? Is that something that the participants in the working group can
ask for? I'm probably asking the wrong people. Maybe we should take this
offline.

Stephanie Perrin: We have to remember that the process is important at ICANN when you're
trying to run something like this where people are necessarily, you know. So
to just throw it out and say, "Well, we don't agree with the charter."
There was a joint Board GNSO working group that set up the charter. And it
went through a consultation phase and, you know, we had our opportunity.
Shane Kerr:

Yes.

Stephanie Perrin: And it all sounds fine, and even the work plan sounded fine. But then when
we start doing it, we realize, "Oh, we're drowning in this stuff.
Shane Kerr:

Yes, it seems to be -- in my limited experience -- a common mistake at
ICANN to confuse work spent with work delivered. I mean it's interesting - it's
interesting that the Board and the GNSO had a joint committee, but the result
-- as we see today -- doesn't seem to be workable.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 21

Stephanie Perrin: Well, and the risk is that we're going to lose good people because I was
talking to a couple of good people yesterday, and they're not going to hang
around.
Shane Kerr:

Right.

Stephanie Perrin: So to your earlier question, "Are we going to keep raising these issues?" You
can count on me to be an utter pain in the neck.
Shane Kerr:

Okay.

Stephanie Perrin: I'm going to keep talking about purpose and all these points forever -- until I
go insane. That's probably why they're leaving.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay, thanks Stephanie. I mean just to include more people in this intense
discussion, I think - George, you want to say something?

George Sadowsky:

I'm not sure what I want to say because I am not up-to-date on exactly

what's happening in the RDS.
But my impression is that the concerns that you are raising are being taken
seriously. So I'm not sure. I hear a lot of passion, and I'm not sure what
you're trying to establish in terms of the mood here or the attitudes toward the
work because I think it is being -- what you talk about, the collection of data -is being considered seriously by the work. So I'm in a bit of a loss to
understand why you're saying what you're saying.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks. That was George Sadowsky from the Board. Okay, yes
(Unintelligible).

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 22

Man:

We're seeing a quite of interesting development why the discussion on Whois
has actually been going on for a very long time. And it seems like it's going to
go on for quite some more time.
In the meantime, there is quite a lot of information out there that is not
necessarily in line with every jurisdiction. There is now this initiative of Dot
FRL and Dot Amsterdam to stop resolving most of the information from
Whois.
So it means that it's not just people in the policy world, but also the people
that are actually implementing it. They have been asking for waivers. They
who have not been getting those waivers are now seeing/saying actually,
"ICANN, we cannot live up to our commitments. We're just going to come up
with the solution ourselves."
How do you as experts look at this trend, if it's something we should be
happy about, if there's further fragmentation? How should we understand this
in the light of this discussion because in the ITF, it's always first you have the
running code and the protocols you adapt to the running code. But legally, it
might not be the best moral principle.

Stephanie Perrin: Perhaps I could fill in. There are many others. There's a wonderful slide back
if you go to the Whois page at ICANN. The GAC asked ICANN Staff to
basically - they wanted an all-things Whois because they were losing track.
There's Thick and Thin Whois, there's the RDAP protocols, there's the
requirements in the ART to have more enforcement. There's the - of the
compliance measures. There's, you know, it's pages long this thing. And it's
very confusing; you lose track.
So one of the parallel activities is the Whois conflicts with law procedure
which dates from, I believe, 2006. This is not the result of a policy

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 23

development process. I believe it was a Board directed outcome of an earlier
Whois review.
And there was a requirement in the registration agreement at the time to
escrow data. So - and the issue of compliance with local data protection law
was also raised.
So there's two ways -- two kinds of waivers -- that a registrar operating in a
jurisdiction that is under the data retention directive in Europe for instance,
and there are other data retention directives. This is not just Europe, but we
always talk about Europe because it's a big target, you know.
So if Michele Neylon, for instance, from Ireland is in a situation where he is
going to be fined by his data protection commissioner, if he breaks the data
protection law and puts his customer data up on the public record, and he's
violating the data retention directive by passing escrow data to Iron Mountain,
and it's also exporting it because they haven't been able to find a (SPL Agent)
in Europe so that's violating the data protection directive in terms of passing
the data to another jurisdiction because Safe Harbor doesn't work. So he's
got three reasons to want a waiver.
He then has to apply for the waiver. And what the waiver process says is you
have to have a letter from a data protection commissioner saying you're
violating the law. His lawyer - this is Alice in Wonderland-ish, you know, and
Michele has expounded on this quite a lot here. This isn't just me; I'm quoting
him.
So his lawyer won't let him break a law that's going to put him in jeopardy,
right. The procedure demanded this.
So we had a review of this Whois conflicts with law. And if you want to get up
to speed, I urge you to go and listen to some of these recordings because it
was a frustrating experience. We just - the poor ICANN Staff who was leading

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 24

it kept saying, "We're not here to change the policy; we're here to see if we
can come up with a new trigger for the process."
And the triggers were things like, well, would a letter from a law firm telling
you you're breaking the law work? Would this work, would that work?
And, you know, quite frankly, I found it a remarkable way to ignore a statute
because the data commissioners wrote to ICANN and said, "Everybody in
Europe will need a waiver -- we're telling you." And ICANN wrote back and
said, "Well you guys aren't an authoritative body."
Well this is the group of data commissioners that was set up under the
directive to coordinate opinions to avoid burden on business. And so ICANN
is writing back and saying, "No, you're not an authoritative body as per our
procedure. You're not a court, you're not - you have no powers. Therefore,
we can't take your advice."
So that's crazy, you know, from a practical red-tape production. As Paula
said, I worked in government a long time. This is not what we're trying to do
in government; we're trying to relieve, you know, relieve burden; not put up all
these obstacles.
Any, I don't know whether that clarifies or not. I think it just shows you the
complexity of this whole situation.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Stephanie. Maybe just (unintelligible) for people. We have coffee and
food if you want, so they're trying to feed you. Farzaneh and (Unintelligible).

Farzaneh Badii:

Yes, so I just wanted to make a couple of comments. We have kind of a
working group. I'm not going to use the normal terms that we use for the
newcomers so that it makes it easier for them.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 25

So we have a group on Internet Governance and we discuss Internet
governance issues -- which are related to ICANN. And we try to do activities
like going to IGF or IGF Internet Governance.
So yes, today we had a meeting with the Board members -- ICANN Board
members, and the CEO of ICANN. And we discussed what we are going to
do and what we should work on which is going to be discussed on the list.
So if anyone is interested to become member of this working group, or if you
want to know more about it, you can come to me or Rafik is the co-Chair.
And there's (unintelligible) - can I talk for like a couple of minutes -- I think
following Stephanie perhaps? Yes? Okay, great.
So the other thing is that - so with this Accountability of ICANN, it is a very
good opportunity for people to get engaged with ICANN. So we have different
subgroups if you are interested in jurisdiction or human rights or diversity or
transparency of ICANN. It can be pretty effective; we can make ICANN a
more transparent and diverse place as well -- ideally.
So you can join those working groups. If you want to know more about it, just
come to me and I'll let you know.
And there's another thing. I would - so we have in NCUC we have executive
coordinator - sorry - effective committee. And we have - so we decide on
more operational issues like allocating funding and sometimes setting agenda
for NCUC. So - and I'm the representative of Europe and that (Comedy) and
Rafik is the Chair.
And I wanted to know -- for members -- I wanted to know if you have any
comment on the performance of the (Comedy) or if you want to make any
comment -- if you want to know more about what's going on. Just
(unintelligible).

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 26

Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Farzaneh. You should be careful. The last country that asked
(unintelligible) for their opening, it didn't end well. Anyway, so thanks for this.
About the cross-community working group on Internet Governance is quite
open, so if you want to join, yes, you can tell me; it's quite easy. And yes, we
can discuss later more. We'll also in NCUC kind of (unintelligible) to give
more insight, what's happening, and what we are doing.
And I think, (Jimkon), you want to add something?

(Jimkon):

Yes, please; (Jimkon).

So I think I'm skipping back about two or three

topics now because I'm very slow this morning. And I know Shane is actually
over at the coffee table.
So I think you made a really good point that - and I know we have a couple of
people around the table here and I suppose this is actually an ask for
everybody that is new to this and has attended the meeting week.
ICANN is not agile. We do not move quickly. But there are a lot of people
who, in other areas, you know, we have people that are involved in the ITF,
we have people that are involved in (unintelligible) developed organizations of
the policy areas.
I'd really like to see -- particularly if joined NCUC -- which is not a hinge to our
next gen people at all. But after the week, can you like put together four
paragraphs on what worked and what didn't? What did you -- when you're in
meeting -- sit in and go, "Well, that's pretty cool."
You know, that's a good way - most of them kind of how we work, you know.
Okay, that worked well, or stuff like you were saying on the RDS process
stuff, you know, that didn't work well because I think we come quite
(unintelligible) in our own way of thinking sometimes that, "Well this is the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 27

way that ICANN works and it will always work that way and it's never going to
change."
The more kind of new ideas and the more ways of thinking that we can get
down on paper as something that we should look at, I think that might be a
good idea for people that are new to this and are observing what we're doing
without any of the biases that follow us that are working inside this house. So
just a thought.
Rafik Dammak:

So you are asking people to write something -- in particular a newcomer -what they think about the meeting, about this and so on?

(Jimkon):

Just what works well -- as a third party coming in. Do you go, "Yes, that
works really well," and what didn't work well? What should we be improving
on?

Rafik Dammak:

Okay, I mean that would be good. I think we can move on now because we
have, I think, 50 minutes left and really talk about this meeting; not this
session I mean but the policy forum because this is a new format. I think it's
new for everyone and we are not sure what we could achieve here and how
we can improve.
Particularly for newcomers, maybe you can give some insight what you see
that should be improved because I think at the end of the policy forum, there
is a session kind of to maybe for planning for next time and also this cast, and
to arise concerns or question or issues. So if you have - I really encourage
everyone to share ideas, and so more new voices to speak.
Gangesh, you want to add something?

Gangesh Varma: I actually wanted to go back a little bit to the CCWG on Internet Governance,
but maybe we can do that later after this.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 28

Rafik Dammak:

Please go ahead Gangesh.

Gangesh Varma: Yes, I just wanted to add to what Fadi was saying - sorry - this is Gangesh for
the record.
So there is a new Board appointed working group on Internet Governance.
So if anyone could share light on how the interaction will be because I have
to skip that meeting a little early. So if anyone who was at the CCWG
(unintelligible) could highlight on what is the status of the CCWG, where it's
going and how it's going to be interacting with the Board appointed working
group.
Rafik Dammak:

Because basically we tried to (unintelligible) with them, so to not duplicate
efforts. And also, I don't think they are - my understanding from yesterday,
they are not planning, for example, to organize (unintelligible) or
(unintelligible). So I think they are looking more -- what I sensed yesterday -to (unintelligible) with us and to kind of to coordinate.
Maybe - Gangesh, you want to add something?

Gangesh Varma: That's right. The reason that we formed the group, I believe, is that Internet
Governance is important. It's clear that it impinges on what we do, and we
just want to have a way of keeping track of it -- having a focal point for things
that are happening in the Internet governance arena that we need to be
aware of. It's tempting to say, well, this is something that we see all the time - that we're used to; we get information from the press, we get it from our
colleagues and so on.
What happens when you mainstream it like that is you lose the focus, so we
want to keep it. And there's no intent to interfere at all with what the
community does in Internet Governance.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 29

Matthew Shears: Yes, thanks Gangesh. I was at that meeting yesterday with Rafik and many
others here.
As I said in the meeting, I think that we need to build a structure into the
relationship between the Board working group and the CCWG. We need to
look at the CCWG as more than just a workshop organizing entity. And I think
we have an opportunity to do much more strategic thinking about Internet
governance -- in particular now that the Board has given this particular focus
on Internet governance and has opened the door to us to working with them. I
think that's a very good opportunity for us to do that.
And also, I'd like to just repeat -- paraphrase -- what the new CEO said which
is very much looking to the community to indicate the direction that ICANN
should be going with regards to a whole range of issues. And one of which -which he is particularly interested in -- is Internet Governance, and I think we
should take him up on that offer and suggestion. Thanks.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Matt; (Willing) here (sic), head of the co-Chair of the CCWG on the
Internet Governance.
I think it's also up to us; it's not just about structure. But it's up to us, for
example, if we want to draw up a statement and position as to get the
balance here to do so.
(Unintelligible), I think our only statement was (unintelligible). And I think we
could make it because the deadline and the (unintelligible), and that time -the context. So I guess if we come back and try to trust more position,
statement and (unintelligible), we can move forward. In the end, it's up to us.
Okay, so just - I mean we have less than ten minutes left. And I think that not
any other business but really to see if we can get more feedback from
newcomer and also from members as risen by Farzaneh before about the

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 30

functioning of NCUC. Hopefully if you have any questions about NCUC you
want to clarify, I mean more clarification, so please do so.
We don't want just them to say - I don't want you to say the word - usually
(unintelligible), but we want to hear more from you guys. So don't be shy.
Also, I am good in volunteering (unintelligible), so it's better that you
(unintelligible).
Yes, please.
(Ben Woods):

I'm just speaking from my experience as a newcomer in the Next Gen. I was
fortunate to have both Niels and Matthew (unintelligible), so I heard about
NCUC from them.
But I think earlier in the process, it would have been - earlier in the week at
least, it would have been helpful to hear more about what NCUC first. But I
think given that Next Gen people come from academic backgrounds -- a lot of
the students -- it's kind of a good forum for us I guess. And it's (Ben Woods)
for the record.

Rafik Dammak:

Thanks. Yes?

Man:

And this is (Unintelligible) from Committee of Risk (sic) on China. I'm kind of
new to NCUC.
I'm very kind of curious about what other specific results NCUC or this group
has achieved. For example, (unintelligible) the drafting of files and also some
other procedures at (unintelligible) because I was accidentally seeking -- this
morning in the Commercial Stakeholders Group -- and I tried to go back to
the work they had done. And actually, a lot of their proposals and opinions
and suggestions have been successfully translated into some of the bylaws
of ICANN including the recommendation of stress test and a lot of other stuff.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 31

And so I'm somehow curious about the subsidiary results you have done you
have achieved in this group. Thank you.
Rafik Dammak:

If you're asking about the bylaws, I think Tatiana can respond to that.

Tatiana Tropina: Yes, actually, this is the start of this because one of the wonderful things
about NCUC is that you are (unintelligible) and you can see the results of
your input. So we - I mean the CCWG and bylaw drafting. Some of the parts
were a group exercise, so no one owns the final result.
But what we really own is - well, first of all, human rights bylaw we started in
August last year a location for this for our reason, and people were kind of
against - many people were against the inclusion of human rights bylaws into
the ICANN bylaws, so we got this.
We have advocated for transparency provisions and we got it. And as far as I
know, we improvised our input to the mission invitation provision, so there
were many successes in this sense. And some of the bylaws we can say that
we contributed on. It was our vision and it was our exercise.
Rafik Dammak:

Thanks Tatiana. Yes, please.

(Grace Popolic): Hi, this is (Grace Popolic); one quick feedback and then a question.
First, I say the brochures are very effective because I saw that your
(unintelligible), and I think that for people who aren't very familiar with ICANN
but are interested in human rights, so (unintelligible), have a lot of the key
buzz words that get people's interest, so that was effective.
My question was are there certain groups or countries that have been key
allies of NCUC? I know in intergovernmental organizations, there's some
countries that always kind of advocate for freedom of expression or privacy.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 32

Do you work with members of other constituencies and stakeholder groups?
Could you talk about that a little bit?
Rafik Dammak:

Yes, that's really good question. I mean we are living in this ecosystem, and if
we want to advance some position we have to coordinate with other groups.
So for example, I think for human rights, I think one big step came from the
Council of Europe. And that was kind of Michele on that matter. And I think
other countries -- maybe you know them.
But regarding, for example, the GNSO, it depends like also the topics. I think,
like, the Whois. For example, we will find a lot of common ground with the
Registrars -- maybe also the Registries. So it depends for some issues.
But we have talked with them because, for example, like the policy
development and the vote and how the GNSO is structured, you need to get
votes on both sides to get things really going. So we have to do that.
But it depends. They are not the same -- or the same groups. For example, if
we come back from a few years ago about new gTLD program and then the
applicant support, one of our biggest ally was (Unintelligible). So on that
topic, we (unintelligible). So it depends. And we always try to liaison with
other groups.
I think (Lisa) wants to add more about (unintelligible).

Man:

Yes, the beautiful thing of the multistakeholder model -- and sometimes the
frustrating part -- is that you can do nothing alone. As Rafik said, the
coalitions are rapidly changing because all of the topics are rapidly changing.
So sometimes you find people on your side that you never expected there to
be, and on the other side. And sometimes you think yourself you would be on

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 33

one side, but you get educated more about the topic because it's all still new
and developing.
But we also see people moving from different stakeholder groups -- as
Stephanie and (Colek Hagau) has said, there are also people who have been
representing governments in the GAC and had been here. Monica has been
contributing to the report on human reports facilitated by the Council of
Europe.
So there are many collaborations going on, and I think that's also what's
making a bit exciting. And I think it's also not unheard of, people starting off in
civil society and then going to either the technical community or the business
community. Shane comes from the hardware technical community as well, so
there's a lot of spillover and a lot to learn.
Rafik Dammak:

Yes, thanks. Any other questions?

(Jimkon):

Hello? Yes sorry, it's (Jimkon). I just - really, really quickly to the same point.
It's really issues-based. And so since I've been here -- I've been around
about two years -- I don't think an issue that I can find that we have worked
particularly internally with other stakeholders on, you know, like we've worked
with business guys on transparency stuff, and we've worked with the IPC on
other things; we've worked with Registries on other things, the security guys
on other things.
It really is - the big thing from the stand of it is because we do diverge on
certain topics, it becomes a very issues-based thing rather than a standing
cooperation thing. And so that's something that took me a little bit of time to
get my head around all of that.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 34

You know, the person in the BC that I was talking to about this topic one day - when I was talking about another topic the next day -- wouldn't necessarily
have the same cooperation. So it's very very much issues-based.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay, so one minute left in this meeting. And so, oh, yes please.

Man:

Could you give a quick word on the politics within NCUC -- if that's not too
contentious of an issue? Within, so the different…

((Crosstalk))
Niels ten Oever:

Get the swords.

Rafik Dammak:

Okay, let's behave.

Man:

And just the competing interest groups within NCUC -- a quick word on that.

Rafik Dammak:

Yes, there are because we are diverse. So geographic diversity, for example,
highlight, I guess, an issue like jurisdiction. I think (Unintelligible), for
example, from India or Brazil have different point of view, and we are trying to
work together on this kind of issue.
It can be also not geographical but can be cross - I mean I want to say
(unintelligible), but for example, public interest and how people interpret that
or they think we should talk about public interest or not. And it's kind also
sometimes really (unintelligible) discussion.
So it's not we have kind of - it's a parliament and you have kind of specific
rules, but depending also the topics, we have -- because of diversity of
geographical diversity, culture diversity, and also the background in different
topic -- we can have different point of view.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 35

It makes it a little bit more challenging to reach consensus, but it doesn't
prevent it. So we work towards that and we use (unintelligible) consensus
and acknowledging the minority point of view and we try to work on some
common position. So it's not always easy, but it's always our aim.
So depending on the issue, there is no kind of - we don't have like a
(unintelligible) fighting each other all the time, but it's just for topics that
people may disagree on.
Okay, yes Niels.
Niels ten Oever:

There are a lot - it's actually - and someone described it like that like the
history of ICANN is a history of conflict. And yes, so ICANN is a proliferation
of conflict by the means of DNS or something.
But - so every - a lot of the decisions and the public comments that we make
also start off with people disagreeing about tactics, about strategy, about the
final goal.
With human rights, people were very concerned that this might end up in
more content -- potential leeway for content control. We've been having
discussions about sexual harassment -- which people thought could also lead
into a possible freedom of expression and censorship issue; there were
people more stronger talking about creating a safe and enabling space.
So there are a lot of very heated and interesting debates going on. So it's a
good place for many shape - for opinion shaping. And yes, I think that's
healthy that that goes on.
And I think there's also a place for proper criticism within organizations and
also on our own structural functioning like we have in EC. And sometimes we
have discussions like this should go different; there should be stronger
accountability be we say that the Board should be accountable. Well, as

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-29-16/12:51 am CT
Confirmation # 8995669
Page 36

software producers say, eat your own dog food, so we should try to enable
that as well. So, yes.
Rafik Dammak:

Okay, thanks Niels. I'd say the people for the next session in this room are
just coming so we have to close this session for now.
Thanks everyone, thanks for attending. And hopefully we can - what? Oh
sorry Stephanie because people are coming and we are running out of time.
And I thought the previous session, they were late too, and so there was no
time between the sessions.
Anyway, thanks for attending and hopefully we can continue the discussion
outside if you want. I think any member of NCUC would be happy to answer
your question. Thanks again.

END

