HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 15:15 to 16:15 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Please sit down, we are going to start.

OLOF NORDLING:

Just for clarity, this is going to be the GAC and the ccNSO
meeting. So if you're looking for something else, well, go look
somewhere else.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much. So this is our meeting with the ccNSO
which is taking place in the afternoon because there was not
time for this in the morning. And it's, of course, an open meeting
to everybody who's interested in what we discuss. I don't want
to lose more time talking. Just give the floor to Katrina, the new
chair of the ccNSO.

KATRINA SATAKI:

Good afternoon. My name is Katrina Sataki. I'm the chair of the
ccNSO and we're very glad to be here today with a one-hour
session -- one-hour long session with two interesting topics for
discussion. And I think without any further adieu we will start

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

with our short report on the ccNSO PDPs. Becky, may I give you
the floor?

BECKY BURR:

Thank you very much. And it's nice to be here. I -- you guys
probably are getting sick of seeing me and Bart up here to
provide an update on what seems like the endless work on
ccTLD delegation, revocation, and transfers. We started this
work probably six years ago with a delegation and redelegation
working group.

We had participants from the GAC in that

process, and as part of that we did a kind of comprehensive
review of delegations and what we then called redelegations to
understand how IANA was handling them, to identify areas
where we seemed to have a kind of moving target and not very
predictable program where the provisions of RFC 1591 had been
applied differently over time and we kind of cataloged that
process.
Following our work on that, we created the Framework of
Interpretation Working Group. Again, there were GAC observers
participating in that process, that several-year process, and our
goal was to understand, before we contemplated any policy
development area, just what it was RFC 1591 says. We also had
as reference documents the GAC principles on ccTLD
delegation/redelegation, and we delivered to the community

Page 2 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

something called a Framework of Interpretation that articulated
a sort of -- a common understanding for applying RFC 1591 in
the context of delegation, revocation, and transfer.
That Framework of Interpretation was adopted by the board,
and we are now in the process of implementing the -- the
mechanisms that were identified as part of the Framework of
Interpretation.

But hopefully the world is getting more

predictable for all ccTLD stakeholders with respect to the
delegation, revocation, and transfer arrangements.
As part of that process we identified two areas where RFC 1591
just didn't really provide guidance and where it appeared that
guidance or mechanisms were needed. And the first is that ISO
3166-1, which is the authoritative list for two-letter country
codes, is obviously not static. New two-letter codes come onto
the list and two-letter codes go off of the list over time. And in
particular with respect to codes that were removed from the
3166-1 list, there is no guidance on retirement of ccTLDs once
they -- once the country code has been replaced or modified. So
that is one area where we know we have a guidance gap and
where those issues have come up and they have been dealt with
but -- and I'm not saying not in a satisfactory way, but it's very
difficult to know how they're going to be dealt with because
there are no policies out there.

Page 3 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

The other aspect of this is that RFC 1591 itself provides that del -that ccTLD operators should be able to appeal or call for a
review if a delegation is revoked, for example. And --- Jon Postel
essentially was the mechanism for many years, but there was
never a formalized review mechanism that was created. And so
the -- the recommendation coming out of the Framework of
Interpretation was that that was another area in which policy
needed to be developed.
That became a little bit more urgent in connection with the IANA
transition where we were also calling for binding review
processes and for enhancing the Independent Review Process in
general.
Looking at that the ccTLD -- ccNSO, after consultation with the
CC community, both members and non-members, concluded
that we did not want the Independent Review Process, or the
IRP, to apply to delegations, revocations, and transfers with
respect to ccTLDs until such time -- until and unless policy was
developed in order to establish the standards and the rules by
which that kind of review mechanism would be implemented.
So here in -- this week we are -- the ccNSO will be issuing -- will
be considering a resolution, a council resolution, to call for the
creation of an issue report to address -- for policy development
with respect to retirement of ccTLD two-letter codes and for

Page 4 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

dispute resolution mechanisms with respect to revocation and
for -- we will -- the resolution will provide for the creation of an
issue report to be considered in Hyderabad and designation of
an issue manager.

We will be appointing a council

implementation oversight team for -- for -- to assist the issue
manager, Bart, and drafting the issue report. And that will be a
CC manager from every region -- one from every -- from all of our
regions plus a NomCom councillor. And we will be considering
this at the council meeting on --

BART BOSWINKEL:

Thursday.

BECKY BURR:

Thursday. Obviously the GAC has been -- we've tried very hard
to make sure that we're keeping the GAC updated on this and
welcomed participation in the working group so far and input
going forward will be very important to us. So I'm going to ask
Bart, who just disappeared, to make it easier for that
participation to walk you through the process through which we
will develop the issues -- issue report and to talk a little bit about
some of the questions that we'll have to answer in Hyderabad.

Page 5 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

BART BOSWINKEL:

Thank you, Becky. Can you start the slides, next slide, please.
Okay. In order to -- as you will be very aware, the ccNSO hardly
runs ccNSO policy development processes. So I'll take you
through some of the steps that are described in the ICANN
bylaws Annex B around this process and I'll end with, say, the
formal and informal ways in how the Government Advisory
Committee and its members, either individually or as a group,
get involved in that process.

So if you look at the policy

development process in the ccNSO you can effectively identify
three stages. The first stage, that's the launch, that's what we'll
be discussing -- or what the ccNSO council will be discussing at
this meeting in Helsinki and that starts with the council decision
to request an issue report. The issue report is a description of
the issues, assessment of the timelines involved, assessment of
whether the issues are within the scope of the ccNSO and then
the end stage of this one -- and that's by Hyderabad -- is the
decision to initiate the ccNSO PDP. So there is a clear distinction
between launching and initiating. That will be relevant in a
moment as well.
So stage two, that's really the development of the policy. This is
where the community really gets involved and based on the
issues

report

starts

developing

the

policy

and

the

recommendations. And it starts with an interim report by the
working group, will be put out for public comments and input,

Page 6 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

may end in a final report or may end in a subsequential interim
report that's more or less up to the working group itself. And
then the final stage -- and that's particularly relevant for at least
the ccTLD community -- it starts with the final report. Once
that's been adopted by the working group goes to the ccNSO
council for adoption. But that's not the end of the process, and
this distinguishes the ccNSO procedure, I would say, from the
GNSO procedures is that the ccNSO membership, so the ccNSO
membership, members, have to vote on the recommendations
whether or not to adopt it.

If they do not accept the

recommendations, then it will not go through. And if they adopt
it, then the board -- then the final report in the form of a board
report will be submitted to the ICANN board of directors for
consideration. Next slide, please.
So characteristics of the PDP, this is another way of looking at
the policy development process. If you look at it the experience
to date has shown with all of the work of the ccNSO it is
effectively determined by the development phase or the second
stage of the process. And in the way the ccNSO is conducting
this, these type of processes, it will include at a minimum two
rounds of public comment and again with a minimum period of
40 days of public comment it includes the analysis of the issues,
development of the recommendations. And a very, very, very
hopeful assessment of the timeline is a duration of six months,

Page 7 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

but this is probably so optimistic, probably you have to multiply
it by five or six to get a real understanding how long a ccNSO
process takes.
Stage three, as I said, includes the members vote, and again, this
could take up to -- or the minimal duration is two months. The
last PDP has taken -- the vote has taken three to four months
because if you look at the annex C or Annex B it includes a
members vote or quorum roll meaning that more -- 50% plus
one of the ccNSO membership needs to take -- or participate in
the first round of voting. Currently the ccNSO has 159 members.
Hopefully by the end of this week it will be 160. So that means at
least 80 members of the community need to vote in order to
have a valid vote in the first round. If it's not -- if we don't meet
the quorum rule, which happened the last time, we have to wait
another month and then the -- an ordinary vote will happen.
Next side, please.
So looking more in depth and building on what Becky just said is
there are two topics at stake which are related. One is the
review mechanism and the other one is on the retirement of
ccTLD. And the interrelation is that decisions with regard to
retirement of ccTLD should -- potentially should get -- be subject
to the review mechanism as well. And as Becky has alluded to,
they are two areas within RFC 1591 where additional policy is
needed.

Page 8 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

So there is two ways of dealing with these interdependencies.
One is, and the first method I'll allude to is a one and single PDP.
So the way it will look most likely is the creation of two working
groups, working group one on the review mechanism and
working group two on the retirement, and most likely they will
act sequentially, so one after the other. First on the review, and
then on the retirement, and then revisit the review mechanism,
if necessary.
Now, one of the disadvantages, or advantages, depends on your
view, is that this total package -- so the output of working group
one and two, so on the review mechanism and the retirement -is subject to the members' vote.
So only at the end, at the conclusion of the work on both topics
the PDP will be closed and the members will vote on it and that
is the closure of the PDP. And only at that stage it will be
submitted to the ICANN Board.
So you will have two. And this would extend the whole process
probably by one year, one and a half year. That's the rough
estimate based on some analysis.
Next slide, please.
A second method is to initiate two PDPs. Be aware, I use the
word "initiate" because what will happen at this meeting, I'll

Page 9 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

come to that in a minute, but this I meeting, the launch -- the
PDP will be launched, and it will be an issue report both on the
review mechanism and the retirement of ccTLDs. And this will
be combined. Based on the, say, outcome of that issue report,
the ccNSO Council will decide whether to initiate one or two
PDPs. So the initiation of two PDPs could happen in Hyderabad
or only one initiated, and at a later stage, the retirement PDP
would be initiated.
Again, the main difference, again, from a timing perspective is
that there will be a members' vote at the end of PDP one and a
members vote at the end of PDP two.
Next slide, please.
Now, in Marrakech the council consulted the ccTLD community
present, and at the time, and from a logics perspective you
would say start with the retirement because the review
mechanism builds on or needs to take into account the review -or the output of the retirement process.

However, the

community in Marrakech, and that was confirmed again today,
thinks the review mechanisms on the decisions around
delegation, revocation and transfer has the highest priority.
Therefore, we will start -- Whatever happens and whatever is the
output of one or two PDPs will start with the review mechanism.

Page 10 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

The community also expressed a preference for one PDP, but it
was not as strong as for the highest priority. And also expressed
to do as much as parallel as possible.
Next slide, please.
Now, Becky already said, so at this meeting, again, this morning
we had a meeting in the ccNSO meeting room around this topic.
What will happen at the Helsinki meeting is -- council meeting is
there will be council decisions on, first of all, the request to an
issue report.

That really launches, kicks off the policy

development process. And it will include a question around
whether to initiate at the Hyderabad one or two PDPs. So at the
Hyderabad meeting, it is envisioned that council will take a
decision on that.
In preparing the issue report, and this goes back to what Becky
just said, what is the background of these topics is, first of all,
what

needs

to

be

taken

into

consideration

is

the

delegation/redelegation working group final report on the
retirement of ccTLDs. This goes back to March 2011.
The ccNSO Framework of Interpretation, RFC 1591, and what is
probably very important, because there are some myths around
it, a lack of understanding, overinterpretation, is the ISO3166
standard, as such, and looking at the rules on assigning codes
and especially on de-assigning codes and what will happen with

Page 11 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

them because that determines a lot of the discussions around
retirement of ccTLDs.
And then finally, as Becky already said, the CWG Stewardship
final report and Annex O includes a lot of material from a survey
around -- with the ccTLD community on whether or not to
include a review mechanism or use the IRP as proposed.
Two other decisions Becky already alluded to is appointment of
issue manager, and the appointment of the oversight
committee, six councilors.
Next slide, please.
And this is the final slide, and this probably most important for
you. What are -- As some of you will know, in the ccNSO PDP
there are some formal points of interaction between the GAC
and the policy development process as such. When it was
drafted, it was included.
Now, the first one is the moment -- as soon as the PDP is
initiated, so at the Hyderabad meeting, the GAC will be formally
asked to offer opinion or advice. That's the only statement in
the policy development process.

Probably it's alluding to

interacting in the process. And when the final report is produced
-- So at the end of either one or the -- the single process or the
dual process, when the final report is submitted to the ccNSO

Page 12 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

Council, so that kicks off stage three, the voting, the GAC will be
requested to offer opinion or advice again. This happened with
the IDN PDP, and we've used that mechanism in the past.
So that's the formal way of interaction of the GAC with the policy
development process.
The second thing, and that's probably far more, say, in this area
or this era of Cross-Community Working Groups and the
experience we had around the Framework of Interpretation and
the fast-track process is the informal participation.

That's

discussion on the issue report as it will be produced just before
the Hyderabad meeting; participation, whatever manner
feasible for individual GAC members, members of the GAC; and
these type of sessions where we'll keep you apprised of what's
happening within the -- in the policy development process.
That's the end of the presentation. Becky over to you.

BECKY BURR:

Yes. We tend to do this very thoroughly and carefully, but it also
is very helpful to us to have views of governments throughout
this process. So we will, of course, be coming back here to keep
you informed but also invite you to participate in working
groups on this again in whatever fashion the GAC feels
comfortable participating.

Page 13 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think this was a lot of information, but a lot of
useful information. I'm sure some GAC members may have
comments or questions.
I see Norway.

NORWAY:

Yes.

Thank you.

And thanks for the presentation and the

overview of the way ahead.
I had, you know -- well, a couple of questions.
One question is the background or rationale for initiating this.
You said a little bit about it, but I can understand the rationale
for the retirement of ccTLDs. That's no real documentation or
processes for that. That's been discussed in the past in years
back.
But regarding the mechanisms for revocation and delegation
transfers, there's a lot of policy documents already in existence.
And of course I would ask GAC -- I would refer to our principles,
the ccTLD principles. So that, of course -- they are already there
and says that most of the policy regarding ccTLDs should be
local policy according to national law.

Page 14 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

So I was just -- With respect to that, I was just wondering what
are the objectives and the rationale? What are you going to
solve or what is the problem of the existing? Are there any
malfunctioning local law arrangements or are there any issues
between

ccNSO

and

IANA

in

this

respect

regarding

delegation/redelegation of ccTLDs that you want to fix? That are
-- That's my question.
Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So, first of all, 1591, RFC 1591 itself describes the existence of a
review mechanism. And this would be a mechanism to review
IANA's actions. That also comes up because the actions of IANA
as part of the CWG transition called for the ability to review this.
Now of course none of this displaces the application of local
national law and none of this displaces the application of the
GAC principles where they apply.

And of course the GAC

principles apply where the ccTLD and the government have
agreed that they apply.
So this does not -- would not displace that. It would really not
affect any transfers, which are defined in the RFC 1591 and
explained in the IFO Framework of Interpretation where the
current operator and the proposed new operator agree. And we

Page 15 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

would expect that because in the first instance disputes about
ccTLD operation should be resolved under local law, to the
extent this is functioning properly, transfers should generally be
voluntary, agreed upon transfers where a review mechanism
would not be needed.
So we are certainly hoping that this is not something that is
needed to be used and called upon to be used many, many
times.
But there are ccTLDs that have been delegated, that were
delegated before RFC 1591 came into existence. So we don't
know quite what the terms and conditions apply there. So we
need some review mechanism there.
Presumably where the GAC's framework of -- the GAC's
principles apply, where the government and the CC operator
agree that those apply, there's also a dispute resolution
mechanism. But for the rest, there's no mechanism to resolve
disputes, although presumably, you know, operators can avail
themselves of going to court.
But this is a -- a mechanism to ensure due process for all in
disputes regarding the transfer and revocation -- revocation and
transfer.

Page 16 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.
Next I have the United Kingdom and Iran.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you, Chair.

And thank you, Becky and Bart, for the

presentation on this. It's been very helpful, actually, to me
personally to catch up on an important area of work for the
ccNSO.
And it's interesting, actually, to see here an example of
opportunity for the GAC to engage in policy development on the
ccNSO side, actually.

We've discussed and worked out

procedures for the GNSO on early engagement in PDP so it's
interesting to see this mirrored here.
My question was really about the loading for us as the GAC,
because this PDP has two elements. There's the retirement of
CCs and also the review mechanisms for the delegation,
revocation, and so on. And my sense or instinct is that the latter
to be more meaty for us, but correct me if I'm wrong, because it
will hit on issues like newly emerging independent countries
requiring a delegation and so on. So situations, scenarios like
that which we'd have to sort of give some careful thought to.
On the other issue, retirement, I don't really have an immediate
sense but, you know, the world does change, and I guess we

Page 17 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

need to understand the process that would flow from a CC being
retired.
So in terms of the interaction as set out there, how do you see it
in terms of relative loading on the two elements, and will there
be an opportunity in the time frame for a really in-depth
discussion face to face at one of the upcoming ICANN and GAC
meetings?
Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So let me assure you that the way the ccNSO has approached
issues -- these issues in the past, both in the delegation and
redelegation

working

group

and

the

Framework

of

Interpretation Working Group is we have operated from -- from a
position of full consensus. As one of our members likes to say,
consensus unless somebody's going to die in a ditch protesting
it, high level of consensus. We never make decisions in the -about recommendations without two meetings so that we get
all time zones into a discussion about it. We proceed quite
carefully. I am absolutely confident that we will have several
face-to-face meetings to discuss this as it -- as it moves forward.
There is no likelihood that this could be sprung on you quickly.

Page 18 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Iran.

IRAN:

Thank you very much for the presentation, and the thank you for
the explanation, Becky. We all know that you're a very highly
qualified expert in this area, and other area. I work with you for
several months. I think the scope of application or objectives of
this should be clearly mentioned. As I understood from you, and
perhaps I had the same impression, the application is for limited
cases. Is not for all cases. And the cases for which is mentioned,
delegated before the 1591. That is the number one, but not after
that. And also could you also clarify that whether it is applied
equally for the member of -- non-member of ccTLD to the ccNSO
because there are ccTLD that are not member whether they
apply or not.
And thirdly, the non-intervention of the national legislation of
each country with respect to the ccTLD and most -- and last but
most important, how you could perhaps involve or request or
perhaps initiate a more involvement of the GAC.

Dear

colleagues, we know that the governments or people in the
government, in GAC, they are very, very busy and sometimes it
might be difficult to -- to express whatever they need to express
in the correspondence. But at the physical meeting they have
more ability, they have more options, because they come with

Page 19 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

preparations, with instruction from the government and so on
and so forth. How we could involve more GAC -- more involved
GAC in the process. And I understand, lastly, that you advise in
there. You do not refer to the noun of advice. Advise means
comments, but not advice with capital A because I don't think
that GAC would provide, up to this stage, any advice with capital
A at this stage of the process. Give opinion, give comment, and
so on and so forth.

So it should not be interpreted or

constituted as GAC advice because we would not say that later
on because we have given our advice, capital A here, we don't
have the possibility to give advice at a later stage to the ICANN
board. So this question, if you could clarify, I would very much
appreciate it. Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So with respect to the last question, it is entirely up to the GAC
when it gives advice. It's not advice unless you say it's advice.
And that is entirely within your control. We would, of course,
welcome comments, informal in -- you know, from individual
members from the GAC as a whole all the way through the
process. But it is entirely up to the GAC to determine when it
gives its advice.
With respect to the scope, I just want to be clear. We could not
create a process that ccTLDs delegated before RFC 1591 would

Page 20 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

be obligated to comply with. The terms and conditions of that
delegation are -- frankly may vary quite widely.
On the other side where countries, where governments and CC
operators have a clear understanding under the -- the GAC
principles, it may be that you have agreed on an alternative
dispute resolution and to the extent that is effective under
applicable law, the device -- the mechanism might not be
available. However, the -- I can't imagine any circumstance in
which the ccNSO would recommend a review mechanism that
was limited to ccNSO members. Just to be clear, we have
members but we afford essentially full rights to any ccNSO or
any ccTLD operator, whether they have elected to be members
or not. And that's a -- that distinguishes us in some ways, but it's
a critical feature of the way. So in our operations, in our policy
development, in our workings, whether you are a member of the
ccNSO or not, you are permitted to participate, and so I cannot
see a situation in which we would say this is -- this mechanism is
only available for ccNSO members. Did I skip anything?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Becky. Further questions or comments on this issue?
I can't see any hands raised. So we have a few -- Norway. Sorry.
Please don't put your hands up like this.
[ Laughter ]

Page 21 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

Better. Much better.

NORWAY:

Thank you. Just a quick one. I am -- appreciate what you're
wanting to do. I'm not certainly agreeing with you that the -- the
only cases where the GAC principles are applicable is when the
CC and the governments agree that they are applicable. The
local law are applicable in any case. So just to -- just to make
that distinction. But thank you for the further clarification of the
intentions. Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So let me -- let me assure you -- and this is reflected in the
Framework of Interpretation report and in other things -- the
ccNSO agrees that as a general rule disputes about operations of
ccTLDs should be resolved in accordance with the relevant law
and you're absolutely correct, of course, that there's nothing
that the ccNSO could do that would prevent application of local
law. We do have some places where there are gaps and -- and
then the application of the CCW -- or of the GAC principles
outside of those places where it's just a function of applicable
law, that is just -- that's what the GAC principles say.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 22 of 43

Thank you. Further comments, questions? Iran.

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

IRAN:

EN

Yes. Becky, could you kindly comment that that very restrictive
way you mentioned that the dispute will be under the national
law I have seen that also having a qualifier, saying that based on
the rules and procedures established by ICANN. Is that the case
or not? Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So I don't think, as a matter of law, ICANN can establish any
qualifier that prevents or interferes with the application of
applicable law. That's a function that exists outside of ICANN
and outside of -- you know, if a ccTLD is within your jurisdiction
and you -- you know, you meet all of the requirements for
asserting jurisdiction over that within your jurisdiction,
applicable law will prevail. So nothing we can do, even if we
wanted to, can defeat the proper application of applicable law.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think we could maybe move to the two other things
that we have on our agenda for the last 15, 20 minutes. So who
should I give the floor --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Page 23 of 43

Peter.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Peter, yeah.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

Thank you, Thomas. Good afternoon, everyone. My name is
Peter Van Roste.

I'm the general manager of Centr, the

European ccTLD codes. A while ago, I think it's three years ago,
Centr in collaboration with the other regional organizations, ran
a survey on the organizational structures of ccTLD registries and
the relationships they had with their governments. From the top
of my head, I think about 80 ccTLDs across the globe responded
to that survey. And as a follow-up, an initiative was taken by the
GAC underserved regions working group to add to that and look
into a couple of more specific issues.
We were asked to have a short discussion about this and I see we
have 15 minutes left. But I propose that maybe Alice or the cochairs from the working group can maybe give a quick
introduction. And then we have a couple of fire starters, people
from within the audience that have volunteered to share some
views on that.
But before I give the floor to Alice, I would like to see a quick
show of hands from both the GAC people in this room and the CC
people in this room. How many people are aware of that survey

Page 24 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

or have seen it? Well no, how many people have seen the
survey, the results? All right. And how many people were aware
that the survey was taking place before the -- it was closed for
responses?

Maybe a dozen.

So Alice, I think we're on to

something here. And it could -- it could answer quite a -- quite a
few of the questions that we had prepared for this. So the floor
is yours.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much. We conducted this survey in 2015, and
the aim of the survey was really to share -- to collect and share
information about best practice and lesson learned because it
was felt there was a need to provide advice in this field, although
we didn't quite get the level of responses we had expected.
We wanted to identify the current challenges and the possibility
of also developing best practice, of course in collaboration with
the ccNSO. However, we only received about 23 completed
surveys, as you can see from the hands raised, which is just
under 15% of GAC members. Most of them came from Europe.
11 respondents from Europe. Asia-Pacific, 7. And 5 from Africa.
None from the other regions.
Although having said that, we have a very good example of an
MOU. Perhaps I'll ask my colleague from New Zealand to share

Page 25 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

very briefly the example that they have, because that's another
brilliant one.
But most of the questions that we were asking on that survey
were mostly around the form of ccTLD managers take in terms of
is it nonprofit, academic, government managed. You know, their
interpretation of what local Internet community is. Whether
governments -- Who manages the ccTLD, if it's a government or
it's -- the functions are outsourced. And the general relationship
between the ccTLD manager and the government.
And I won't get into the details of that, but what I think we
promised when you send a request is we're going to make the
results public and perhaps seek your collaboration in terms of us
perhaps strengthening this study and making it more valuable
and ensuring that we get more responses in the spirit of
collaboration.
But for now, I think I would like to invite my colleague from New
Zealand to share our valuable MOU that she shared with us
yesterday or today. That might be helpful to guide us in the
further discussions on this.
Thank you.
New Zealand.

Page 26 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

NEW ZEALAND:

EN

Yes, thank you, Alice.
I'll just briefly describe the MOU that New Zealand has just
concluded. For those of you who don't know, .NZ is run by a notfor-profit called Internet New Zealand. We have no national
legislation, and until now we had no formal documentation on
how we had a relationship with our CC manager.
So building on the concept from the Underserved Regions
Working Group, we wanted to demonstrate what we considered
best practice for New Zealand and the lessons learned from
discussions in the GAC over what hasn't worked in the past with
CC management; to submit the institutional knowledge of how
we work together in New Zealand for future analysts who sit in
my role; and also to demonstrate to the New Zealand public how
we maintain oversight of what is an independent organization in
New Zealand.
So the MOU which I've circulated to the GAC working group, and
I understand is also available if you just Google .NZ domain
management, describes the world as we see it. So it talks about
the policies and principles we use with reference to RFC 1591,
the Framework of Interpretation report, and the GAC principles.
It talks about roles and responsibilities we have, and our shared
objective in ensuring that the ccTLD is managing interests of the

Page 27 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

local Internet community and what we mean by the local
Internet community in New Zealand.
I'll just -- You can all have a look at it and I'm happy to answer
questions if you have any.

I will say it was an interesting

process. We have a good working relationship with our ccTLD,
but it still took two years from concept to signature.
We wanted to do it while our relationship is positive because it is
very difficult to start these things when you are already in
disagreement.
And also just note that in the spirit of the B meeting, there is a
ccNSO session tomorrow at 10:45 where you will be able to hear
what our ccTLD manager thinks of the process that we just went
through.
Thank you.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

Thank you, New Zealand. Thank you, Alice.
We have two speakers from the CC world that had a look at the
survey and were happy to make some contributions. I suggest
we start with BE. First we have Peter Vergote from DNS Belgium,
and the Jan Vannieuwenhuyse from the Belgium Government
Advisory Committee delegation.

Page 28 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

Thank you.

PETER VERGOTE:

Thank you, Peter. Good afternoon, everybody. My name is Peter
Vergote from .BE.
When it comes down to the survey, and more specifically the
relationships between the ccTLD within a certain country and
the GAC representation of that country, I would like to
emphasize on two key points that prove to be very valuable in
our specific situation of Belgium. Obviously, this is a personal
view for which I don't want to call it a mantra that is fit for
everybody in this room, but the two key points I want to stress
prove to be very important in developing relationships between
us and the Belgium GAC representation.
So I'm just putting them in front of you as they might provide
valuable information for you as well.
The first thing that I want to stress is know each other. I think -- I
can be mistaken, but if I look at what has been going on in the
past, I have this feeling that for still many countries, there is no
immediate linkage between ccTLD and ccTLD staff and their GAC
representation.
People are coming to GAC -- to an ICANN meeting, but there is no
exchange, there is no personal contact. And more importantly,

Page 29 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

even if there is a very short and occasional contact, there is no
follow-up in between ICANN meetings.
Now, if you really want to work together, a ccTLD and local GAC
representation, then I think you should start to reach out to each
other and take the opportunity of ICANN meetings and other
international fora to look out for each other, to sit down and to
discuss certain topics of interest.
So that's the first point I wanted to raise.
The second point is it's not only about knowing each other. The
more difficult thing is also understanding and having some
empathy for each other's position. And this is, as we understood
and we learned in Belgium, it's an evolving process.
I mean, about ten years ago, we still had a bit the "us against
them" feeling. Like we're the registry. We are supposed to run
our operations, while we looked at our government as a
potential intervenent.
Well, this is absolutely not true.

I mean, most of the

governments are not remotely interested in intervening in the
day-to-day operations for their ccTLDs. They are looking for
something that is more higher in the priority list. It's to secure if
something -- if something happens. If, for instance, the registry

Page 30 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

fails and the country goes into a vacuum when it comes down to
the management of the local ccTLD.
So understanding this really helped us in coming to very good
balance. Now in Belgium you have, in the legal framework, you
have a certain set of principles which are just there in case of
need but not tampering in any way with the day-to-day
management and the state of affairs of the local ccTLD manager.
So I think it that looking at those two principles or key points, in
our case it helped. And maybe it can -- it can be inspirational in
enhancing cooperation between individual GAC representations
and their ccTLD manager.
Thank you.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

Thank you, Peter.
Jan.

JAN VANNIEUWENHUYSE:

Thank you very much, Chair. I also want to give my perspective
as representative of the regulatory authority in Belgium.
In Belgium, as has been said, we have in the law on electronic
communications a framework in which the manager of .BE
domain names, the registry, must operate. It only defines the

Page 31 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

high-level principles which have to be followed by the registry
and foresees an ultimate sanction in the possible redelegation
to another not-for-profit entity.
The (indiscernible) for Internet Electronic Communications
which is responsible for electronic communications is also
responsible for surveillance of this article in the legislation.
And to our experience, although sometimes initial positions on
public-policy issues -- one example was some time ago, the role
of the DNS.BE, which has to be played by DNS.BE, in misuse and
abuse of .BE names are different and discussions are difficult. At
the end, we were always able to find a consensus which was and
is acceptable for everyone.
So for us as regulatory authority, up to now this model worked
quite well. It works quite well. And we see us, main reasons for
that that first of all, DNS as registry creates a lot of transparency
and openness on everything, even on the very minor details.
And the regulatory has an advisory seat in the board which
facilitates this a lot.
Furthermore, we have, since long time, this collaboration, so it's
a kind of tradition of working together. And this results in a trust
relationship, which is important. And, also, what I see is that
board members of DNS.BE are very aware that the registry

Page 32 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

operates and has to operate in the public interest, and as this
reflects if decisions are taken.
So of course, and just to end my intervention, this all depends
on the people, but from our perspective, we hope we can
continue on this path.
Thank you.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

Thank you so much.
As a last intervention -- I have Patricio Poblete from .CL, Chile.
Patricio.

PATRICIO POBLETE:

Thank you, Peter. I am Patricio Poblete from NIC Chile, the
domain name registry for .CL. And I believe surveys such as this
one is a very useful thing to do because it help us better
understand how things with right now and try to see where
they're going and perhaps help them move in a good direction.
The number of responses as I see that were received is not as
high as one would have expected. The previous survey of the
ccTLDs that Peter mentioned through something like 76
responses. So it's quite a bit more.

Page 33 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

I don't know if there are plans to ask again or in a future survey
to try to reach a wider set of respondents because from a small
sample, we risk getting a picture that doesn't really fit the
reality.
For instance, if we look at the profile of the respondents in this
survey, about half of them are ccTLDs that are run directly by
governments or in a very similar situation.
In the previous larger survey mentioned by Peter, that fraction
was about 20%.
So there is a bit of overrepresentation of ccTLDs run by
government that might bias the perception if we only went by
these responses.
So one of my hopes would be that in the future, we could get
more people to answer, more governments. Hopefully all of
them, or very close to that.
On the other hand, people tend to answer when they have -when they are not really comfortable with the current situation,
when they have issues. So perhaps no news is good news if we
look at those that didn't reply.
And in that sense, I would feel if it is true that many of the
governments in the world are not really uneasy with the setup
that they have right now, that would be a good thing in the

Page 34 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

sense that one of the things that we value the most in regard to
the Internet is stability. If things are working right now, we
should think very well before introducing a move in a direction
that might lead us into instability and perhaps effects that we
didn't really foresee when we did that.
So stability will counsel us to look very carefully into changes
that we might want to make. Not that we would never make any
changes, because if things are not working, we need to fix that.
And speaking a bit from my own experience in Chile, we have
been doing this for a very long time. Ours is a very old ccTLD,
and over the years we have developed a very good working
relationship with the government, and perhaps I would say with
the governments because they have a tendency to change from
time to time. We are -- one of our activities every four years or so
is to get to know who is in charge right now, who the minister is,
who the undersecretary and the -- getting them to know what
we do, how we do it. And there are many mechanisms in place
that regulate the way domains are delegated and perhaps they
are revoked if the case might be. And we now have FoI which is a
very -- it's a great improvement in making things more
understandable for everyone. But at the end of the day, the
principle reason why in our country we have stability in terms of
the DNS is because there is a perception that the domain name
registrations are working well, that the processes that are in

Page 35 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

place are efficient, that domain name registrations are
reasonably inexpensive so the community in general accepts the
situation as it is and is reasonably happy with it and that there
are ways for them to get everybody to know when somebody is
not happy with the situation. We have an advisory council that's
with participation from the government and from the private
sector. The council was actually created by government decree.
So we have reached a situation that's very stable, and nobody is
really proposing that we should change that radically. And I
would suppose that that's the case in many places in the world.
In the case of where that's not the situation, where there are
reasons to ask or to hope for a change, I think that FoI is -- is the
-- a document that now that it exists we should get to know it
carefully. It's now being implemented. The IANA should take
that as its guide when it comes to delegations, revocations, and
transfers and new delegations. So I think we -- with the FoI we
are in a much better situation than we were before.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

Thank you, Patricio. Alice, you had a comment. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you, and thank you for that question. One of the roles of
the underserved working group -- GAC underserved working

Page 36 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

group is capacity building. And one of the reasons -- one of the
reasons and aims of this survey was -- was to do exactly that. It
was to gather information requested by some governments so
that they could derive some lessons from the uniform best
practice that they could adopt in their situation. So it was in no
way -- the survey was in no way aimed at trying to change
anything, and we acknowledge that the FoI does exist and we
did contribute to it.
But also taking into consideration the very few responses we
got, I think it might be worth reviewing it again at this point,
especially within that context of the underserved working group.
We may conduct a survey that might go deeper into requesting
what GAC members may want to see in terms of building
capacity in this area. So I just want to let you know that it wasn't
meant -- the survey wasn't meant to change anything. It was
more as a contribution to capacity building, which is the role of
the underserved regions working group. Thanks.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

All right. No more questions? Iran.

IRAN:

Yes. Just I want to embark on the two issues that we have
raised, and it is important to highlight that. One is, from our

Page 37 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

colleague on the podium, it was mentioned that if the
mechanism is in place, it works, don't change it until a problem
is reported -- sorry, unless a problem is identified, reported, and
recognized to be a problem. So don't change it. It's working.
That's one sign of the coin. The other side of the coin that
maybe have a relation with that, there is no contact or very little
contact that's in the ccTLD manager and the local GAC people
until they come to the GAC meeting. Even they come to the GAC
meeting one is one room, the other is in the other room. There is
no communication so therefore you have to -- if not intervening
in the internal affairs of the country, at least identify the need for
a closer collaboration and coordination. So this is two things
that we have to mention. Thank you.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

Next question U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thanks very much. I just wanted to illustrate the U.K. approach
to interaction between the government and the ccTLD registry.
In our case Nominet which runs .U.K. We don't have a regulatory
framework for the -- what we -- we set up three years ago a
multistakeholder advisory group on Internet governance,
comprises about 40 stakeholders. That covers the whole roster
of Internet governance policy area. And within that group we

Page 38 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

have a subgroup that looks at ICANN issues, domain names,
IANA stewardship transition, and so on. And within that group is
-- Nominet is represented -- represented, and that is the -- I
guess the primary mechanism for us to interact from the
ministry with -- with Nominet on the whole thrust of ICANN
policy issues in anticipation of these meetings and in relation to
ongoing ICANN processes and so on. So we find that mechanism
works well for us in maintaining close contact, understanding of
the GAC agenda, and ccNSO priorities and so on. Hope that's
helpful. Thank you.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

It is indeed. Thank you so much. One more comment, Egypt?

EGYPT:

Yes, thank you. Manal Ismail from Egypt. Just a very quick
question on the statistics part and whether the figures reflect
the number of governments who responded or the number of
ccTLD responded for because we, for one, we have submitted
two responses, one for the IDN ccTLD and one for the ASCII one.
So just to -- thank you.

Page 39 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

ALICE MUNYUA:

EN

We took that into consideration that yes, there were two
responses from Egypt and we have seven from the Africa region
and Egypt responded to two, yes.

PETER VAN ROSTE:

All right. Thank you so much. No more questions. Once, twice.
So I think from -- when we started off the debate there was, I
think, clearly a lack both in particular probably in the ccTLD part
of this room but also in the GAC part, maybe a lack of awareness
of the survey and its intentions. I think that we heard a couple of
good stories of those that collaborated not just on the survey
but more in general on a day-to-day basis and that good
cooperation is typically based on knowing the people and not
just meeting them at the ICANN meetings but also making sure
that in between those ICANN meetings those relationships are
maintained and followed up on.
I thought it was an interesting discussion. I still welcome all
suggestions on how CCs can help you to improve the response
rate to that survey or how we can help you with our experience
on running surveys to ccTLDs. We've been doing that for 20
years now, on how to function surveys and make them easier to
respond to. So thank you so much. Over to the chair.

Page 40 of 43

EN

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Your thing is still on, your microphone. Thank you, Peter. Before
we conclude, Spain has a quick question that may be interesting
also for the ccTLDs. I think we should give Gema one minute to
ask -- half a minute to ask the question and another half to
answer it.

SPAIN:

It's really quick.

You may have noticed that I'm on the

mitigation plans proposed by registries to avoid confusion
between the use of two-letter names in the second level of new
gTLDs and country codes few of registries proposed to conduct
phased delegation periods, sort of sunrise periods, in which they
could give priority to ccTLDs to register those names in the first
place. Has the ccNSOs have a view on this? What experience do
ccTLDs have with prior fixed delegation periods that were
conducted with pre-2012 new gTLDs. Thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

We could run a survey perhaps.

BECKY BURR:

We actually have looked at this question and asked this question
over the years. There is an enormous diversity of views on this
issue within the ccNSO. Some members would want to take

Page 41 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

EN

advantage of that. Others would -- would not. So there is no
consensus view in the ccNSO on that.

BART BOSWINKEL:

Maybe in addition to that I think this question was asked at the
first Singapore meeting sometime -- some years ago and there
was a whole session on that between the GAC and the ccNSO,
and different ccTLD managers at the time shared their
experience around this topic. So I can go back and look at, say,
the session. And in my view, I think it was transcribed as well,
and I think the views at the time have not changed, maybe a
little bit more liberal by now. So I'll check and say the session
between the ccNSO and the GAC when this came up as well. This
was just before or around --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

2011 or something like that.

BART BOSWINKEL:

Yeah.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay, thank you very much. I think that was an interesting
pointed. So we're slightly over time, so I just would like to say
thank you and, yeah, let's continue dialogue. That's it.

Page 42 of 43

HELSINKI – GAC meeting with ccNSO

KATRINA SATAKI:

EN

Thank you very much for having us here.
[ Applause ]
I just wanted to say that at 5:00 p.m. we -- in our ccNSO room,
it's Veranda two, it's a slightly smaller room, but we're going to
run another cross-community session and we're going to talk
about the operational side of ICANN. If you're interested -- and
we really anticipate a very interesting discussion on this topic,
so if you're interested you're warmly welcome.

OLOF NORDLING:

And in direct competition with that at 5:00 starts the crosscommunity session on new gTLD subsequent procedures in this
room. At -- 1700 hours or 5:00 p.m., whatever you prefer.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 43 of 43

