HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 17:00 to 18:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

XAVIER CALVEZ:

We’re going to start this session in two minutes.
Hello, everyone. It’s three minutes past the hour so we are going
to start this session. This new session, Cross-Community
Operational Planning, is a new session that we’re going to try
today with this group is to offer an interaction between the
ICANN organization and the community on the ICANN operating
plan.
The purpose is twofold, is to increase the understanding of the
community on ICANN’s operations and to allow the community
to provide input to ICANN executives on their area of
responsibilities in the ICANN operations.
This will enhance the capability of the community to provide
input during the operating/planning process and it also will help
the ICANN executives to plan more effectively on an annual
basis.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

The approach is that we will have a short presentation from
each ICANN executive on their area of responsibility and we will
follow this short presentation with a Q&A session.
The idea of this interaction resulted from conversation with the
ccNSO SOP Working Group – the SOP Working Group is the
Strategic and Operating Plan Working Group. It’s a permanent
Working Group from the ccNSO whose focus is to look at the
planning activities of ICANN, and through interaction between
this working group and the staff we have had the idea of
creating this session to interact on the operations. And because
we believe that the interest was on this type of interaction could
be much more than simply for the ccNSO Working Group, we
thought it would be best to have this session be crosscommunity and open to anyone interested.
For this first session, the ccNSO SOP Working Group has offered
three topics of interaction: an overview of engagement and hubs
operations, which Sally Costerton as VP of Engagement will
provide; and an overview of HR operations, which Susanna
Bennett, COO of ICANN, will provide. Giovanni Seppia is the
Chair of the ccNSO SOP Working Group and has offered to
moderate this session. Giovanni, a few words? Thank you.

Page 2 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

EN

Thank you, Xavier, and thank you, Susanna, Sally, Diane, and
Patrick, for being with us today. It’s great to see you here. As
Xavier pointed out, over the past years the ccNSO SOP has
provided ICANN with a series of comments regarding certain
areas of the work as they were presented in the operating plan
and budget every year. And during the Marrakech meeting a few
months ago, we thought it was a good idea to ask possible
questions directly to those who are at the top of the
departments that are in charge of these different areas and to
ensure that there is an interaction, not only with Xavier’s
department that has been providing us with a lot of information,
clarification, background, notes about what’s behind the
process of producing the operating plan and budget, but also to
have an interaction again with those in charge of the different
areas.
And among the different areas, let’s say the most wanted areas
for more information and clarification were certainly HR, the
hub, and office engagement strategy of ICANN. So we thought it
was a good idea to start with those, but yesterday during the
ccNSO SOP meeting, we also highlighted other areas where in
the future we would like ask ICANN to meet and interact with
those in charge of the other areas. So it’s with great pleasure
that I welcome ICANN staff today in the room to provide this
overview. And again, I invite not only the ccNSO SOP members

Page 3 of 49

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

who are attending this meeting today but all the ccNSO
community and other stakeholders in the room, to ask
questions at the end of each presentation so that again we can
interact and see how we can further clarify all the matters that
we may have left pending over the past year.
So thank you again for the opportunity.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Susanna, do you want to start on the…or Sally, you will start
over the engagement presentation?

SALLY COSTERTON:

Good afternoon everybody. For those of you who don’t know
me – which I don’t know, probably quite a few, looking around
the room I recognize quite a lot of faces but not everybody – my
name is Sally Costerton and I lead what we call stakeholder
engagement at ICANN, which is quite a general term. My day-today responsibilities encompass quite a number of areas of
ICANN’s

outward-facing

activities,

including

overall

responsibility for the meetings team, who put on this fantastic
event that we’re all at at the moment. All our engagement team
around the world. I have a lot of involvement with our
communications function, and very recently I’ve also taken over
oversight of our development and public responsibility team.

Page 4 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

So in that process, I’ve been at ICANN for just under four years,
and many things have changed and developed in that time
frame. What I’m going to try and do, and just very briefly, is in
two parts. So I’ll start by giving you an overview of our
engagement strategy, and I will explain our hub strategy, and I
will try to articulate the difference between the two. Sometimes
they’re closely related, but our hubs are not just there for our
engagements, just to be very clear. It’s a very common
misunderstanding and maybe we have to really work on our
communications about that.
And then I’m going to hand over to Patrick Jones, my colleague,
who I’m sure many of you already know, who works very closely
with me in this program, and also Jeannie Ellers, who is sitting
here in the front row. Do you want to put your hand up, Jeannie?
If there’s anybody at ICANN who doesn’t know Jeannie I’d be
surprised, but anyway. And the three of us have been very
closely involved in the second part of the presentation which I
know that Giovanni was keen we should discuss, which is about
goal setting and metrics and measurement.
So hopefully at the end of that it will be a bit clearer, but I’m sure
there’ll be questions and I look forward to a lively discussion.
Next slide please.

Page 5 of 49

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

So what you see at the bottom of this slide is the way we think
about engagement. And it’s really a very simple idea. Three
concentric circles. So in the very middle of that circle is the
existing ICANN community – so people who are at ICANN
meetings, who are part of our SO/AC structures, who are part of
the Board, who are part of the staff – this is what we mean
loosely in this inner circle. And as you can see, the strategy that
we deploy in terms of our engagement and communications
resources for our community in that sense is mainly support
based. So we’re here to help you do your work. Wherever you’re
based,

whatever

your

specialist

interest

is,

whatever

stakeholder group you are involved with. And in doing that, we
work extremely closely with the policy support team that is run
by my colleague, David Olive.
And as time has passed, that closeness has deepened to the
level that David and I now co-chair a larger coordination group
inside ICANN staff which has representatives on it from every
department that is touching the community. That would include
our IT and product development team, our meetings team, our
languages

team,

also

our

communications

team,

our

engagement team, our policy team. So we try to make sure at a
staff level that in that support role for our community members,
that we’re thinking in a joined-up way.

Page 6 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

Could we go back to the slide with the three circles on it? We
seem to have gone to the end. I must be being very boring.
In the middle circle – keep going, that’s it, thank you – in our
minds we think of this as particularly through a very regional
lens. We have eight regional vice presidents who are positioned
around the world to support you in a slightly more localized
way. All engagement in the end is really local, of course. But we
try to do that in a reasonably harmonized way that reflects
common global interests as well as specific bespoke local
requirements.
And many of you will know – and we’ll talk about how we’re
measuring it later – we are mainly operating that strategy
through what we call regional engagement strategies. And
Patrick’s going to talk about those a bit more in a minute. And
they are largely community-based groups working with staff to
address the local and regional needs for your different
stakeholders in the different parts of the world.
And then finally, in that outer ring, are people who are affected
by our work but don’t necessarily know that yet. Really
important group, and as it says in the text on this slide, that
group has been particularly activated towards ICANN through
this process of the IANA oversight transition. For many people in
the world, suddenly they know about ICANN and they are

Page 7 of 49

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

thinking about ICANN and they are wondering whether they
understand enough about what happens at ICANN and what
implications in effect that might have on them in their role as a
registrant or other participant in the Internet as a user.
And predominantly our strategy – not exclusively, but
predominantly

–

our

strategy

there

is

through

our

communications channels and through the content that we
produce, that it comes now in many, many, forms – everything
from video to infographics, from newsletters to local speaking
points for meetings, and almost everything in between. And a
key element in that group is the languages capability. If we are
to make ourselves understood, if we are to help that group of
people who do not spend time with us – and maybe never wish
to spend time with us like we are today – understand what we
do and why what we do affects them and how they can engage
with us if they want to, they have got to be able to understand
us.
And it sounds so easy, but a lot of time and resource goes into
making that work. And we’re not there yet. And this group
touches our website very strongly and our web assets, as you
might imagine.
So let’s move to the next slide. I’ve covered the next slide. My
presentation skills are better than I thought.

Page 8 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

Okay, so hold that thought in your mind as we go in, and we’re
going to delve into a bit more detail now about how we look at
some of the programs and projects that are in those layers and
then how we measure them. Patrick.

PATRICK JONES:

So we’ve provided the slides. It will be posted on the session
node for this event so that you will have them for your own
reading. What I’ll provide an overview now is of our regional
strategies and plans.
Five of our regions are currently, they have community-driven
bottom-up strategies. This is the Latin America and the
Caribbean region, Africa, Middle East, Asia-Pacific, and the
Oceania regions. Oceania launched their regional strategy in
Fiscal Year ‘15, and the others were launched in Fiscal Year ‘13.
Asia and Africa have realigned their strategies to match up with
the ICANN goals and objectives from the ICANN strategic plan,
and Africa and the Latin American/Caribbean Region have
redrafted their regional strategies completely as of Fiscal Year
‘15 and they are now following along with the ICANN five-year
strategy.
North America, Europe, Eastern Europe, and Central Asia do not
have bottom-up community-driven strategies but our regional
vice presidents have their own regional work plans, and those

Page 9 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

do take into account input from the stakeholders in the regions.
And these plans are, they are matched with our ICANN strategic
plan. So these are all built around, it begins with the ICANN
strategic plan as the base and then the plans then take into
consideration the regional community needs. And I think this
does fit well with the comment that was received from the
ccNSO and SOP, is that you wanted to see better alignment of
our work with the input that’s coming in from the regions.
The next few slides show you how the regional strategies are,
the timing and the number of projects that are underway with
each of these. It’s also useful to see the number of objectives for
each of the strategies. So for example, the graph represents the
regional objectives goals and how they fit with the ICANN
strategic goals. So for example, Africa shows nine regional goals
under the objective “Evolve and further globalize ICANN.” And
it’s difficult to read it in the chart, but if you take a look at the
detail, this should provide a better understanding of how the
regional plans match up with the ICANN objectives.
The regional plans are now at the phase – and this gets into the
discussion around KPIs and metrics – there is work underway to
gather the metrics that have collected across the regions and
synchronize these efforts, identify gaps, and where there are
similarities across the regions, to help set measurable goals. And
right now there’s regional work plans in place. We’re in the

Page 10 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

process of setting targets. And this also – this relates to where
we’ve identified some challenges with our previous KPIs. We’ve
now been trying to come up with solutions to address those
through better collection of data and also better data that we
are displaying for the community through our dashboards.
Maybe I’ll take a pause there and see if Giovanni or anyone has
questions about the way we’ve structured this. All of this is
around taking what we’re measuring now and building from it,
taking in the feedback from the community and being able to, as
we go forward into FY17 and beyond, how can we better show
outcomes and impact of the work that we’re doing in
engagement.
And that is the end of the slide deck, but you’ll have it for your
future further use.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Patrick. Thank you, Sally. Is there any question from
the attendees of this session? [Roloff], there is a mic in the
middle of the room and as we have done this morning, please
get close to the mic. It will function soon.

[ROLOFF MEYER]:

Page 11 of 49

Okay, soon.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Soon.

[ROLOFF MEYER]:

[Inaudible].

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

No. Can you please activate the mic in the middle of the room?

[ROLOFF MEYER]:

[Inaudible]. I think then the question then it’s with regard to one
of your slides, Sally. I can’t literally quote the slide but it says
something like, “The objective is to make sure that everyone
who is affected by the work of ICANN knows about ICANN.”
Something like that, right?
I think it’s a very honorable goal, but I think you could well argue
that everybody who uses the Internet is affected by the work
that ICANN does because one of the things that you do has to do
with IANA and as soon as we use the web…well, resolving
etc…root zone. So I think you’re going to perform very poorly on
any KPI affected with regard to that objective for a very, very,
long time. And I don’t completely understand why you think that
would be necessary. Everyone.

Page 12 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

SALLY COSTERTON:

EN

[Roloff], thank you. It’s a really good comment. You’re right, of
course.

[ROLOFF MEYER]:

[Well, that’s not always the case].

SALLY COSTERTON:

No. Okay, fair enough. You said that, fine. On the record. You’re
right. You’re definitely right about this point, let me put it that
way. It reflects – hello, McKailey. Are you coming to address me
in person? Okay, thank you.
This reflects where we started. And what I showed you was very
transparent. I mean, this is where our engagement strategy
came from, if you will; its kind of genesis. What you will not find
is a KPI for that goal. So in that sense it isn’t accurate actually to
call it a goal. I would call it – I’m not sure what I would call it. But
I think it’s a…pardon…a dream. Yes.
One of the things that I’m incredibly happy about is that we’re
here having this discussion, because we actually don’t spend a
lot of time at ICANN meetings talking about engagement. And
I’m really happy that this has been put on the agenda because
now we’ve been doing this and we’ve done a lot of things in the
last three/four years. And ICANN has changed a lot and the world

Page 13 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

has changed a lot. And we have new Bylaws, we have a big
change in our community.
And I would welcome an opportunity for us to gather informally,
for people who are interested, to have more ongoing discussions
about how…this particularly this question about measurement,
as we move forward and we say, we look at ICANN’s scope and
ICANN’s Bylaws, and we say, “How do we make sure that our
engagement is in scope and that we are very tightly aligned, not
just to our strategic plan but to our scope and to the
expectations that come from that?” That is an evolution of
where we started from. And that will give you a subset, actually,
of that group, if that’s helpful. But thank you. You’re raising a
really important point.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Sally. McKailey.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Thanks. A couple of things. First off, where do you define a
stakeholder?

SALLY COSTERTON:

Page 14 of 49

What, you mean in the slide deck?

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

MCKAILEY NALEM:

No, anywhere.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Anywhere.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Yes, no. Because the thing is this, you’re talking about
stakeholder engagement.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Yes.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Yet I don’t see a definition of who constitutes a stakeholder.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Right.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Which then leads me on to…which is the bit missing. Because
what I’m seeing several people here from the ICANN side
presenting, and I’m also noting people who are missing. So for
example, Chris Mondini and his team have been doing a lot of
stuff around business engagement, yet you seem to have the
business engagement as something which is separate to the

Page 15 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

overall global stakeholder engagement, which seems to be –
unless the two are some way pulled together which I’m not…I
don’t see that. I mean, maybe I missed the slide. Great, Patrick.
You’re going to help me out here?

PATRICK JONES:

So the way we’ve structured this is that there’s the regional
engagement that happens, but we also have functional
engagement, too. So global business engagement, technical
community engagement, the civil society engagement, all of
that, and also we work closely with our government
engagement colleagues. So where maybe we segment
stakeholders into the traditional four stakeholder group areas,
but those are all part of our team.
And Chris Mondini for global business has his own global
business work plan that he works from.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

So is he part of your team or not?

PATRICK JONES:

Yes.

Page 16 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

MCKAILEY NALEM:

EN

Okay. It’s just because then the other thing is that the last couple
of slides that you have some of these KPIs that you’ve decided
on. Where are those published? Where are you actually sharing
the information?

PATRIC JONES:

Yes, so we do have some of these on the ICANN organizational
Dashboard. We will admit that we internally have more data that
hasn’t made it to the ICANN-wide Dashboard and we’re going
through this process now of improving our KPIs and we’ll be
publishing those as FY17 goes on.

SALLY COSTERTON:

But you make an excellent point, McKailey. And it’s an absence
in the slide deck. It is very easy for us to attach to this a structure
chart that shows exactly who is in this group and which
stakeholders they address. And it is a matrix. So just to add to
what Patrick said, at a regional level each regional vice president
is asked to balance, as equally as possible, resources across the
four stakeholder groups in their region. So both global
coordination and regional focus on the WSIS stakeholder
groups. So we’ll add that structure chart to this so that everyone
can see it.

Page 17 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

MCKAILEY NALEM:

EN

Okay, thanks. Could you go to the last slide where you have the
KPIs, please?

PATRICK JONES:

Also this is a representative. It’s not into the detail and if you
want the detail we can provide this. I’m trying to get to – this is a
sampling of the regional metrics that we are collecting, and
we’re turning these into KPIs.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Right. It’s the…

PATRICK JONES:

This one?

MCKAILEY NALEM:

No.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Which one do you want?

MCKAILEY NALEM:

It’s the one where you have what you’re doing currently, what
you’re planning to do on the KPIs.

Page 18 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

PATRICK JONES:

This one.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Yes. Because the one that concerns me the most is it’s the
stakeholder journey aspect here. Because what concerns me is
that you don’t seem to have been tracking that, yet that to me
would appear to be the most obvious one. Because…I’m
speaking as a registrar, we have registrars from all the regions
where we have certain positions which are elected positions for
our representatives and we are meant to have geographic
diversity.
Now if you’ve looked at the AFRINIC report on diversity within
ICANN you realize fairly quickly that there are much deeper
diversity issues. But as Chair of the Registrars I have to throw
that out, because I can’t turn to you and actually with a straight
face say that I can actually give you that diversity within our
representatives because at the moment I can’t even get the
geographic.
So if you guys are investing the ICANN budget in stakeholder
engagement, then the stakeholder journey as in those who are
actually engaged and what’s happening to them in turning those
into active, useful participants, is key. And that it isn’t a KPI at
the moment, it’s only a future KPI, is quite worrying.

Page 19 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

SALLY COSTERTON:

EN

Right. That is the central challenge now, right now. So I just want
to explain this because what you’ve said is the most important
thing we can say about the metrics and the KPIs.
What you’re seeing here is what often happens in organizations.
When you start doing KPIs and you start doing metrics, you
measure what you can see, you measure what you can count,
and any of you who have ever been involved in putting together
with KPIs and dashboards will know that this is one of the
weaknesses of doing this. What we want to do and what we are
straining every sinew to do and what Jeannie here sitting in the
front is spending an inordinate amount of her time doing, is
precisely what you’ve just said.
So the brief that we have in my team – which is surprisingly hard
to do, but that’s not what this session is about unless you want it
to be – is exactly that. Because in a way, that is ICANN’s mission,
is how do we deliver, and demonstrate that we are delivering, a
pipeline of qualified volunteers that is representative according
to the Bylaws, according to the mission, that is functional, that is
helpful, and how do we track that through right from that outer
circle right into the center circle?
And in some cases, we don’t need everyone in the world to go
into the center circle but we need enough of the right people

Page 20 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

from the right places with the right expertise. So it’s not just
measuring people as they come towards us, it’s also increasingly
in the future going to be about saying, “Where do we need to go
to find the people that are not here? Where are the gaps in
expertise, in the working groups?”
I was very struck by some comments you made in a meeting we
were in together earlier in the week about this. The need for
finding the right people and making sure they come to ICANN
more quickly so that we don’t just represent what we’re required
to do by our mission and Bylaws, but we also have a good pool
of volunteers. Otherwise our existing volunteer community is
just going to collapse.
So you have absolute commitment that that is front and center.
You really do. And I’m very happy for that to be on the record.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Sally. Thank you again, McKailey. Jay, you’re the
next.

JAY DALEY:

Thank you. Jay Daley from .NZ. On the same slide, website
metrics isn’t an outcome or an impact. I’m glad that this change
is taking place because the left-hand side isn’t KPIs, as you’ve
said, and I’m pleased about what you’re talking about.

Page 21 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

It still seems that there is still much further to go on the righthand side. Do you have a time scale, not so much for when you
deliver it, but when there will be clarity about the right-hand
side that those of us who are in this position look at that and go,
“Yes, those are real outcomes.”

SALLY COSTERTON:

Right now today, I’m not going to say to you a week on Tuesday.
But you’re absolutely right and I take that action. I think it’s an
important goal for us as an engagement team to be able to have
more detailed, clearer communication about this activity and
what are the steps in the process. What does done look like? And
how far are we from done and what are the milestones that we
need to get to?
And, by the way, I don’t want you to hear what I’m saying as
meaning ‘slow.’

JAY DALEY:

No. I realize that you might like to avoid saying next week on
Tuesday, but we really do quite like people saying that because
we like to hear commitment and a plan, and that target and
knowing that there’s a target set.

Page 22 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

SALLY COSTERTON:

EN

I take that point and I don’t want to be flippant. This is a serious
point. I kind of in a way reoffer my offer of earlier. If there are
people in this room or in this group or anywhere else in the
community that would like to convene in a more informal way
as we go through this process, I personally would really welcome
that. Not because we don’t have ideas. We do. But without
taking up the whole session, there are some quite tough
constraints – well there are just constraints, constraints are by
definition tough – that we have to often make trade-offs against.
And I think we haven’t been very public in that discussion and I
think that this is what I’m taking from – that’s why I said earlier
I’m very happy we’re having it – but I’m also recognize for many
of our community this is perhaps not very interesting or
relevant, but for some people it’s highly relevant. So I hope we
can further that conversation. And I’m not avoiding making
commitments on time, but what I know is even with some of my
colleagues on this panel, there are interdependencies and I
think the more visibility there is of those interdependencies the
better.

JAY DALEY:

That would be great if there were a slide of those so that we
could see those, yes. Thank you.

Page 23 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

EN

Thank you, Jay. And thank you again, Sally.
Just one point as Chair of the ccNSO SOP, that this is a comment
that we have put forward since many, many years. And since
many, many years the feedback of ICANN has been that ICANN is
in the process of setting those KPIs and so we have been hearing
that for the past four years. And so when Jay say we like to hear
time frames, we’re not hoping to hear next Tuesday, hopefully
you’re going to get some rest after this week next Tuesday. But
let’s say that…and we all agree that for certain areas of your
work it is incredibly difficult to find good KPIs and also to find
KPIs that go over years.
But what we would like to see is at some point to see these KPIs.
And so I try to reformulate the question of Jay. When do you
think you and your team would be comfortable to say, “Okay we
have a baseline of KPIs in the future”?

SALLY COSTERTON:

Okay, so let me just to be a bit clearer, because now I’m
underselling what we’ve been doing. I’ve gone the other way.
Actually the team has made an awful lot of progress in terms of
both defining KPIs and agreeing metric and goals. And without
wishing to be sort of pedantic about it, they are different. But
even establishing that and a culture inside ICANN and the
community that even…that’s actually surprisingly difficult.

Page 24 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

So we actually have a lot of KPIs and a lot of data now. And
frankly, this is not particularly secret or anything. And I, as I say,
if there is a smaller group of people that want to sit with us and
really understand that and get underneath it, I’m very happy for
that to happen. And to McKailey’s point, if an ultimate goal or a
really important goal is to be able to measure and track the
stakeholder journey from end to end – and it absolutely is in my
opinion – then it would be really, really helpful to have a wider
group of input from community members to say, “Okay, well if
you’ve got all of these here now, Sally, well that’s great. Because
we didn’t know that and now we do and that’s much better than
not knowing it.” And it needs to be no, we haven’t had four years
in zero, because that’s not true. And some of this is public but we
have a lot more.
The second thing is that helping us to solve some of those
problems about how do we close the gap between what we
need for a credible stakeholder journey map, if you will, and
measurement of that, and what we have. So I hope that’s
helpful. But it’s very genuine. I really don’t want to give the
impression that we’re hiding away.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

No, that was not at all the message I was trying to deliver at all.
The message is that, indeed, like the ccNSO SOP has on

Page 25 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

numerous occasions said that we are all available – the ccNSO
SOP – to sit with you, your team, any time to help you to
improve KPIs and to make the KPI’s journey a nice journey for
you and your team. And again, with our experience, different
ccTLD registry managers will be so happy to do that.
Patrick, and then I have Xavier, and then Eduardo, and McKailey
again.

PATRICK JONES:

So quickly. In the lead-up to this meeting we did a number of
preparation calls, and there’s nothing that would prevent us
from turning that preparation before coming here into, how can
we show you more of what we have already been collecting and
work with you on what we could improve with an eye towards as
we are going to start the FY18 budget process and I think we
could make progress in between the meeting just by doing a call
or a series of discussions.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Just a very quick comment. Without necessarily committing as
Sally has indicated on a timeline for all these outcomes metrics,
putting it differently, the next opportunity to share information
and the one that’s available by then is the FY18 operating plan
and budget. And by then the team will have made further

Page 26 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

progress and will be at least able to have an overview as to
what’s available by then. So that’s the next point that I think is
useful to work towards because then that’s also a basis for the
community then to provide comments as to what’s there, what’s
not there, and the progress that have been made.
I think that will establish a good rhythm which also can be
complemented by what Patrick just offered, to do on a more
substantial meeting interaction in between meetings.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

And again, we are ready to help. Eduardo, and then McKailey.

EDUARDO SANTOYO:

Thank you, Giovanni. Okay, my name is Eduardo Santoyo. I am
from Colombia. And I’m going to talk as my capacity as
Chairman of LACTLD. We have been working with ICANN in this
region on engagement since 2013 and we can provide our
testimony that this is very useful for the region and I guess for
ICANN purposes, too. Because we have been doing many joint
activities, not just with our community but all the communities
in Latin America and I guess what we are having on these joint
activities a very useful result for both parties.
But at the same time, I’m also going to raise the attention on
how could [be affected]. [inaudible] we’re doing together

Page 27 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

cancelling the meetings in the region. Because it will also have a
lot of impact in many engagement activities because one of the
most important activities to engage people from ICANN issues is
how many meetings on the regions. And cancelling two
meetings this year will have a very serious impact on the region.
That’s what I wanted to mention.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Thank you very much. Thank you for your help with the regional
engagement strategies. They wouldn’t work without you, any of
you. They’re really for you and with you. But I really appreciate
the feedback and I know the team will.

You raise a really important question. It’s two questions actually
in a way. What is the role of the ICANN meeting in our
engagement goals and strategies? There was a, as you know, a
big meeting strategy working team, a cross-community effort for
I think nearly two years to produce the new strategy. And that
group spent a lot of time trying to answer that question. And so
we know two things, or we did at the end of that.
One is that it is less effective than we would like, actually, at
outreach in our local communities when we take the meeting
around the world. So even when we do take the meeting around

Page 28 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

the world, we have a lot of work to do – this was the view of the
community group – to ensure that there is much higher
frequency, more depth, more breadth, of engaging local and
regional Internet community members when we are actually in
their city. So we should not assume that even wherever we do go
that we are yet mature enough in that effort. And there are many
community working groups paying attention to this, but we
have a way to go with that.
The other side of it is – okay, so, having said all of that, there is
no question in my opinion, and I am not a professional meeting
organizer but I’ve done many of these now – going to a city with
an ICANN meeting makes a difference. I absolutely agree with
you. It makes more of a difference probably in Marrakech than it
does in Los Angeles. I don’t know, maybe that’s not true. There is
an element of importance – and we had the Policy Forum partly
because they would be smaller meetings and it would allow us
to go to smaller cities – where there would be more impact. This
was one of the considerations of the working group.
What happens when we can’t go? That was your question. The
reason I made my preamble is because I recognize that there is
an impact and therefore if you don’t have a meeting you lose
that impact. Very occasionally – and it is extraordinarily
unfortunate that it has happened in this way; you have had a
double whammy, a double impact – things come along which

Page 29 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

are totally outside ICANN’s control, where we have to make a
collective decision that we cannot go ahead and we have to
change, we have to postpone. In this case we have postponed,
not canceled.
But nonetheless, there will be a gap. You will lose that platform
in your region to do with whatever you might want to do. What
we have done for the benefit of everyone else is we have put
together a very senior group of staff to spend time with you and
with your regional stakeholder group to make sure that we’re
doing everything we can to put new and extra engagement
activities in with more people coming to you than we would
normally do. Normally the regional activities are inside the
region, but we recognize that there are things that we can do in
this specific circumstance. Even if we don’t bring an ICANN
meeting, we want to do everything we can and we will allocate
some additional resources. And I think you already know this,
but we’ve agreed to allocate some additional resources to make
that happen.
So sometimes, as in many other areas of ICANN, we have to
make pragmatic decisions because we face no alternative. And
in those cases we will always seek to try to do everything we can
to mitigate, which is very much done in engagement with the
local regional stakeholders. And we will do everything we can –
we will postpone, not cancel.

Page 30 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

But I don’t wish to imply that this is not bad for the region
because that would be wrong and it would be inappropriate. But
all I would say is nobody is more disappointed that we had to do
it than I am. We never want to do it. When we picked a location
we pick it for all the right reasons. A great deal of work goes into
selecting, and it is incredibly difficult and hard work and
disappointing if we have to change.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Sally. McKailey. The very last and short question.

MCKAILEY NALEM:

Thanks, Giovanni. Just being a bit pointed about this. The total
budget involved in all of this is not insignificant. So I think the
thing really, and I’ve asked you all this before so it’s nothing
new, it’s that it’s not just a matter of KPIs, it’s also a matter of
return on investment. So I mean just something that you need to
bear in mind when you’re looking at this, because the amount of
money is significant. And if you are spending money and you
cannot show some kind of return on that and you cannot
quantify it in some way, then realistically you might as well put
the money in a pile on the floor and set light to it. Which in a cold
winter in the darks of certain parts of the world that might be a
good use of the money, but I don’t think that’s really what you
should be doing.

Page 31 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

SALLY COSTERTON:

EN

McKailey, I don’t think it’s pointed, or at least not in a negative
way. I don’t take it that way. I completely agree with you. I
couldn’t agree with you more. And what we have at the moment
is, as you know as you can see, we’re being very open. We are
counting and measuring lots and lots of things, but it’s actually
really difficult to answer that question right now. Not because
we don’t want to, but because it’s not joined…now, if we can
measure a stakeholder journey properly, we can also measure,
in a way, the cost of that stakeholder journey, and then you can
start to make a judgement about what you – and I’m not putting
off answering your question, I’ve got no problem in having a
value for money conversation through whatever frame people
want to have it. I genuinely really haven’t. I mean, at the end of
the day this is all in the public domain. We go through it when
we publish the budget. We’re not hiding anything.
But I want to be able to answer that question, because I want to
know the answer to that question quite apart from anything
else. I have to make decisions about how we do allocate
resources, and we have to show that we’re doing that in the
public interest and we have to show that we’re fulfilling our
scope and our mission. And I’m highly aware of that. And I really,
really am very committed to being able to do that as part of that
process. I wish it was easier than it is, but it is possible.

Page 32 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

EN

Thank you. Thank you, Sally. Thanks again to all those who
asked question for this first part. We have some sort of time
constraints, so if Sally and Patrick are available for a session in
Hyderabad, a similar session like we had today, I would like to
invite you to participate in this session about and have the hub
strategy presented in Hyderabad.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Absolutely no problem. I am feeling – is this a reward or a
punishment, Giovanni? I don’t know. I can’t decide.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

We’ll discuss it later.

SALLY COSTERTON:

But no, seriously, I think we should absolutely do that. And can I
make the suggestion that we in a way we have a kind of more of
a dialogue between now and then, and we do have a bit of a
workback plan so that when we meet in Hyderabad we’re not
having the same conversation’ we’ve really moved the needle
and we can focus specifically more on the hubs then and we can
prepare for that. Because it is really rather different. But thank
you for the invitation.

Page 33 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

EN

A pleasure and again, between now and Hyderabad we’ll be
ready to help you as I said for the KPI journey.

SALLY COSTERTON:

Good. Definitely.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Then I’d like to pass the floor to Susanna for the second part,
which is about the HR strategy of ICANN. Thank you, Susanna.

SUSANNA BENNETT:

Thank you, Giovanni. Thank you to all of you for having us here.
There’s a great opportunity and really good that we have this
arranged and hopefully that we will continue this [inaudible]
adding value and transparency.
First I wanted to just give you a little background about myself
and the team. First actually I wanted to introduce the team.
Many of you, probably all of you, know Diane Schroeder, VP of
global HR and also administration. She’s our second employee
of the organization, has been with the organization for about 16
– 17 years. And I have to say I’m very, very, fortunate to have her
on the team. I turn to her all the time for advice and very sound
advice and judgement.

Page 34 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

And to my right is Xavier. Many of you or probably all of you
already know him. Extremely talented in finance and many other
areas, and working very closely with all of you and the Board,
especially recently with the CCWG and CWG on the PTI [side]. So
I’m very fortunate to have both of them and the rest of the team
in Operations.
A little bit about myself. I joined ICANN three years ago. As of
July 1st will be exactly three years. And it has been an amazing
journey. And I have to say I’ve never joined an organization with
such talent and dedicated people. And when I joined I felt that
there is such a good match with my background. I’ve been with
tech companies for the 25 years of my career focusing on very
much on organization excellence and change management,
particularly with companies who start up or turn around or
mergers/acquisitions so a lot of change management related
areas and I’m very, very, passionate about that.
So when I joined ICANN three years ago it was quite different,
like Sally was saying, different from today, and we’ve grown a
lot. And we have come a long way in many areas and really
thankful for the team, a lot of dedication from the staff and also
from the community. I’ve never seen such involvement from the
whole world in such a journey. So very much I feel very fortunate
about that.

Page 35 of 49

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

So today’s focus is on HR strategy. And so how we manage HR is
very much a focus on the strategy that’s built together with the
community. And that drives how we formulate our plans. So you
can see on the slide here we have the strategic plan that was
done with the community, and then the operating plan for the
five years period also done in conjunction with the community.
Then that drives the annual Budget and Operating Plan, then
work with the community on the achievement of that.
Then within the organization, how we manage our work is also
driven by the strategic plan and operating plan. If you can shrink
the slide a little bit, that would be great can see [inaudible].
Great.
And in the framework of

the organization excellence and

elements of, of course, the budget and cost management,
project managements, many of you know that we post that on
ICANN website for you to see how we progress with each of the
projects. And through people management are driven by the
strategic plan and operating plan and also looking at risk
element and reporting. We have many reportings. We’ll go
through that later on in this deck.
Okay, am I driving this? Yes.
So the goals specifically relate to the operation team is the
objective three that two goes within objective three. The goal 3.1

Page 36 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

and 3.3: “Enhance ICANN long-term financial accountability,
stability and sustainability.” And then 3.3, “Develop a globally
diverse culture of knowledge and expertise available to ICANN’s
Board, staff, and stakeholders.” And our team have been
focusing on those two areas and building the strategy of
operations.
Okay. So HR, what we’ve been focusing on are three key areas.
One has been a [trust and] strategic partner. Two are staff and
aligning and engaging with our executive and management
team and develop a world-class work force start with talent
acquisition, acquire the best talent and then develop our people
and also try our best to retain the very best staff.
And, of course, building HR excellence, we follow several models
including EFQM Model. Many of you are familiar with this one.
And we have embarked on the internal assessment each year
since FY15. And we’re looking at enhancements in many areas,
particularly on the system side to enable us with more analysis
to make sure we are doing the right thing and growing the right
places.
Okay, with this I would like to have Diane go through the next
section.

Page 37 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

DIANE SCHROEDER:

EN

Thank you, Susanna. So the slide you see here basically
summarizes the department. We are a global HR department.
We are based in all of the regions. And we offer four basic
services to the internal staff. One, the employment – just the act
of acquiring and bringing on staff – rewards, organizational
development, and then operations within HR [IS] outlook on it.
The challenges that we have is while we’re not necessarily a very
large operation, we are a very complex operation. From an HR
side, we’re spread throughout 30 countries. Just within the
United States we’re in 18 different states. We have people who
engage in many different types of activities from the technical to
the engagement people, the policy people, to the operational
people. And we try to take all of that different aspect of our staff
and provide everything that they need to perform at the highest
possible level.
One of our real focuses in the last couple of years has been
building an organizational development department function
within our HR. And it’s had, at its core, five key areas to really
focus on. The box that is in front of you represents those five
areas:

leadership

development,

organizational

change

management – as some of you know, we’ve been going through
just a little bit of change in ICANN recently – learning and skill
development, organization strategy and talent management,
which all leads into team and organizational effectiveness.

Page 38 of 49

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

So we’ve really tried to focus on a journey in these areas, putting
in what’s reasonable for the foundations and then building on
them as we have more experience with our staff in these areas.
Performance management is an important and key part of our
total strategy for HR. We have a twice a year evaluation system
where staff set goals with their managers and are rated on those
goals, how they’ve achieved them, as well as the behaviors that
are taken to perform at a high level.
So the performance management system leads into our
compensation

program.

We

have

an

annual

average

performance score that comes out of the two performance
management reviews that we do. This feeds into compensation
data that’s driven from the market. We use two main
benchmarking studies. One is Willis Towers and Watson, and the
other is Radford. And this leads into an HR guidance that’s given
to the managers for compensation adjustments which we do
annually.
Our compensation program has been built on guidance from the
Board of Directors, and they have given us guidance regarding
how to position our compensation within various comparisons
of markets within the framework that we have where we have an
at-risk compensation program that is guided by the goal setting
of the staff and the performance management and by a blending

Page 39 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

of the different types of markets that we compare our salaries to
when we do the benchmarking.
And with that I’m going to go back to Susanna.

SUSANNA BENNETT:

Some of these dashboards you have seen. We post them on
icann.org on a monthly update. I wanted to go through just a
few with you to relate to the budget that you have seen.
So look at the head count first and a few other stats I want to
share with you. As of May this year, we have 357 staff, and it’s
below the budget right now. The reason being below the budget
is that we have a lot of work going on. It’s challenging for the
team even to have the time to fill certain positions. Many of the
team members just had to absorb the work and they just put in a
lot of hours to make sure that they get the work done. So we
have not been able to fill some of the positions, but the work has
been achieved, as you can see what has been happening with
our transition.
So the total staff number is below budget and also the average
number of staff this year is below budget. And next year, FY17,
we target to grow to 386 staff at the end of the year, and that
includes 11 staff in the new gTLD group and then the rest in

Page 40 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

ICANN Operations. And that includes the staff also working on
the transition.
Then the growth trend as you can see that we had a huge growth
in 2013 to 2014 – about 46%. Then after that, the growth had
been tempered and slowed, and the team had been working
tighter together and the growth in that 2013/2014 was very, very
necessary to get the organization ready for the next phase.
Next slide, please. Okay.
Here is a picture to show how our staff are spread all over the
world. You can see the various areas. Of course, we still have the
highest number in the United States or North America area.
However, the growth in the North America region has been very
small in the last three years in compared to the other regions.
The other regions been growing about over three times. And the
highest growth definitely in Singapore and Istanbul hub. When
we started over three years ago and also in [inaudible] and
[inaudible] regions outside of the Hub offices.
Next slide please. Okay.
Here is to show you a bit about the diversity of the organization.
Diane, would you like to cover this one?

Page 41 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

DIANE SCHROEDER:

EN

So this shows some statistics – and we put them together
recently for the first time, surprised a number of people –
particularly in the diversity/gender area. We are currently – and
this is the end of May – almost 54% female. Which I think is great
for the type of organization that we are and the way that we’ve
grown in the recent years.
We also, I think, have an interesting age trend which is that we
are on the average 41 years old. So we’re sort of right in the
middle of a working life is where our average comes. And then
the years of service probably won’t surprise those of you who
have watched our growth over time. So we’ve effectively had
staff in place for just a little over 16-and-a-half years. And so we
have 5% of our staff who’s been there more than 10 years, and
the biggest percentage of our staff has grown in the last one- to
three-year time frame.

SUSANNA BENNETT:

I also want to show you the turnover in the organization. We
measure ourselves against a target. It’s a [inaudible] survey
benchmark and that’s a global benchmark of 13.4% that’s the
most current trending 12 months benchmark. And so you can
see the other bars in grey, that’s our ICANN staff turnover. Each
one of the bars is looking back 12 months at a time. And you can
see that it increased to as high as 11.8% late last year. We kind of

Page 42 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

analyzed the factor was relate to the announcement of Fadi’s
departure and the changes affect the people’s perception of the
next phase of ICANN.
And then as we progress on hiring the new CEO Göran and also
the work on the transition, right now looking back 12 months as
of May our turnover rate has dropped down to 9.1%. And a lot of
it definitely is a credit to the HR team and the management team
putting a lot of efforts to development of the staff and efforts on
retaining staff.
And I turn over to Xavier to cover this slide.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you, Susanna. On this slide we want to provide an
overview of the various channels of reporting that contain
personnel or HR information across everything that ICANN does.
So most of you know that we have a strategic operating and
annual operating plan and budget process in which information
on personnel costs and the head count of the organization
appears, notably in the annual operating plan and budget. We
have Board oversight through the various committees of the
Board who receive information relative to personnel and
personnel costs, and we mention here the Board finance
committee, the Board risk committee, the audit committee as
well, and there is also a Board reporting that occurs on a

Page 43 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

recurring basis that contains a lot of the information that you
have seen on those previous slides.
We have also a regulatory type of reporting that occurs through
our tax form. ICANN, being a tax-exempt entity, has a very large
tax return to produce every year, as any non-profit organization
in the U.S. And that tax return contains a lot of information
relative to personnel and compensation. About half of the tax
return, which is about 100 page, contains compensation and
salary information.
On a quarterly basis, as many of you know, ICANN conducts
stakeholder calls during which the activity of the previous three
months is disclosed at a fairly high level of detail and of course
contain also HR and compensation information. And we also
publish on a quarterly basis financial statements that are not
audited. We publish them on a quarterly basis providing a
statement of operations, a statement of position which is also
called a balance sheet, and in which there is also compensation
information or personnel cost information in them.
On a monthly basis we have mentioned earlier in the
presentation that we publish our management system coming
from the system called Workfront. We publish also the monthly
dashboard. You can look at it every month. A new version of it is
published every month, and we’re currently in the version one of

Page 44 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

the dashboard, and the versions measure the evolution of the
dashboards which represents the progress made on refining
KPIs, notably as a result of the comments that we receive
through the public comment process of the budget.
At ICANN meetings, this is also an opportunity to provide
information and feedback, and we have at most meetings
except this one first Meeting B, we have organizational
excellence sessions that cover financials, EFQM, also updates,
which is in our continuous improvement process, and also risk
management updates that are usually provided at ICANN
meetings. So that covers most of the information that is shared
at different periods of the year on the both the financial area as
well as the HR and compensation area.
I think we’re through the slides.

SUSANNA BENNETT:

Yes, with that thank you Xavier and Diane. And thank you again
for this time, allowing us to share our work with you. Please, any
questions we welcome your questions and input. Thank you.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Page 45 of 49

Christopher. Could you please open the mic? It’s open.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

CHRISTOPHER WILKENSON: Is this it? Anyway, could you tell us a little bit more about the
Human Resource aspect of the transition, and particularly about
the staffing proposals for post-transition IANA PTI?

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you, Christopher, for this question. So many of you may
know in relation to Christopher’s question that there’s been a lot
of ongoing discussion on how to organize the staff who supports
the IANA functions, and the current proposal from the
implementation team is to have the IANA dedicated staff being
seconded into the PTI legal entity. The secondment can be
described in other words like a lease of employees basically. So
the employees have a contract with ICANN but are dedicated to
the IANA functions operations that are hosted within the PTI
entity.
There is also a set of resources who are not dedicated to the
IANA functions but still contribute to the IANA functions. As an
example, the IANA department of ICANN today utilizes IT
resources that are not necessarily dedicated to the IANA
functions, but shared across the entire ICANN organization. So
there is also a set of resources whose activity contributes to the
IANA functions. Those resources will remain in ICANN, but the
costs of the services that these resources provide will be
nonetheless allocated to the PTI.

Page 46 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

There will be also officers for the PTI, and these officers will be
including for the general counsel and the treasurer will
be…those corresponding positions for the PTI will be held by
ICANN staff simply because those positions are not full-time
positions within the PTI. And for example, for the treasurer, it
seems that I will be offered as a candidate to be the treasurer of
the PTI. It doesn’t have to be me but that’s also a relatively
natural thing to do.
So that’s a quick overview of the PTI IANA functions staffing
approach.

GIOVANNI SEPPIA:

Thank you, Xavier. Any other question? I personally found the
presentation – I really like to thank Susanna, Diane and Xavier
for the presentation on the HR, which received quite a lot of
comments in the past year. And it’s been incredibly useful to see
how the structure behind what we can see when we read and go
through the operating plan and budget, and also the strategy.
And both presentations to wrap up this afternoon session has
been a long day for everybody. So I like to wrap up a bit earlier
to allow everybody to breathe a bit before the social
engagement of the evenings.
But I’d like to thank all of you – Patrick, Sally, Diane, Susanna,
Xavier, and all the ICANN staff here in this room because at the

Page 47 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

ccNSO SOP level we have been looking for this kind of excellent
information and details for a long time. And it’s incredibly
valuable for us. It will also enable us to provide comments in the
future round for future strategy plan and operating plan in a
different way, because now we know that we can contribute
more and we know also that there is a baseline strategy, a clear
structure, behind everything that we have been seeing when we
went through the past year’s strategy plans, operating plan, and
budget.
So thanks a lot on behalf of the ccNSO SOP and as Sally said, we
hope that this can be a session that is replicated in the next
ICANN meetings and as the ccNSO SOP, I reiterate our
availability to meet informally any time in the future via phone
or in person at an ICANN meeting at a local or international level.
So thank you so much again to all of you. Thank you.

SUSANNA BENNETT:

Thank you very much, Giovanni. I wanted to add that this
session is very valuable to us to…we want to really put a good
effort to show the accountability and transparency. It’s very
important to us that you know this is one of our objectives. So
thank you for giving us this venue to do so. And definitely look
forward to the future opportunities. And the HR area is definitely
a journey, and it’s been an incredibly rewarding journey and we

Page 48 of 49

HELSINKI – Cross-Community: Operational Planning Session

EN

wanted to continue this with the community’s input to be the
very best, and thank you again.

XAVIER CALVEZ:

Thank you, Susanna. I’ll wrap up very quickly. I think this was a
first instance of that type of engagement, but I think we have
already taken note of the next instance. We’ll replicate it, we’ll
improve it, and please continue to participate and to advertise
also these type of sessions. And as we go I think we’ll continue to
improve them to have more participation, maybe more
information a lot of input. Thank you very much for taking the
time to attend. It was a well-attended session so thank you for
that. And thank you very much for the ccNSO SOP Working
Group that’s been obviously instrumental in making this
happen. So thank you, Giovanni.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 49 of 49

