HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 08:00 to 09:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

We’re ready to start.

ALAN GREENBERG:

[Foreign language]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Please, state your name before speaking to allow the
interpreters to identify you on the other channel. Please, every
time you speak, and also for transcript purposes. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you very much. We are starting late, partly because we,
around about 8:00, there was no one in the room. And the last
few minutes, I do apologize, it was my fault because I was trying
to get some things in order. We have an hour allocated for the
first item, and I hope we will be able to come to closure well
within the time allocated that’s left.
That’s going to require the cooperation of people. Let’s not
spend time talking about the same thing over again if we all

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

agree, and we will use a two minute intervention, if indeed,
people have something that is really important, we will be
flexible, but let’s try to keep things concise. Can we have the
slide up for the first…? We do have the slide up for the first
thing.
And I’m not on Adobe Connect, so I’m going to look at cards.
Staff can advise me if we have any hands up, please.
First slide. All right, the purpose of this session is to look at the
generalized selection committee, and its use with regarding
selection, recommendations of people for the CSC slot, where
we have an extremely tight timeline, that we do not want to
miss. The timeline is the 22nd of July. So that means we would
have to convene, select the group, decide on its rules, convene
it, make a recommendation with enough time for the ALAC to
ratify.
Given that people will pretty well disappear for at least a week
after this meeting, that’s going to be a real challenge, but I don’t
see we have any alternative. There are a number of issues that
we have agreed to already, pretty much on the list, and I would
like to go over that. But Olivier would like to speak first.

Page 2 of 30

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

OLIVIER CRÉPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Alan. Olivier Crépin-Leblond speaking. I
just wanted to ask whether you thought that this selection
committee would just be dealing with one appointment, or
would it then be a standing one that could deal also with the
appointment of, for example, person on the SSRT?

ALAN GREENBERG:

This is the ALAC selection committee for the rest of this calendar
year, and the model that will be used, unless the group makes a
change, for future years.

We will be willing to learn from

experience if it doesn’t work, but the intent is, this is, we’re
making decisions for ALAC going forward. But the first, it’s first
use will be something that has to be decided in three weeks.
All right. What I think we pretty much have agreement on is
there will be two members per region, plus I believe we have
agreement that it will be led by the ALAC Chair. I’m not sure we
want to necessarily lock that in for future ones, but at least the
current incarnation. If that’s agreeable to the ALAC.
The members will be selected annually after the Annual General
meeting. So like most of our groups, appointments go from year
to year. There will be per region, one ALAC member, and one
regional representative selected by the RALO leadership, as per
their processes. That means a RALO that feels comfortable, the

Page 3 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

chair may simply name someone, perhaps in consultation with
other people.
In another region, they may have a call for nominations and a
vote. All be it, that’s going to be difficult in the timeframe we
have for the first one. Next slide. Okay, is there anyone who
disagrees of that overall model? Or would like to speak to it?
Yes Tijani, go ahead.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Okay. It’s not disagreement. Tijani speaking. I think that for the
selection committee, it is better to give it a term of one year,
starting at meeting B, because the selection will be done for the
end of the year, and we will not select the members of the
selection committee, and the selection committee will select the
other appointees.
So one year, starting today, or starting meeting B, for the
selection committee, and for the others, it is already the
calendar year.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Maybe I didn’t understand that. Let me make sure… What I’m
proposing, is that on an ongoing basis, it follows the Annual
General Meeting procedure. We will, however, start now with a

Page 4 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

group which will sit through the annual, through this upcoming
Annual General Meeting.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

What I am saying is, since the selection committee will make the
selection for all of the appointments, and all of the
appointments are for the calendar year, it is not normal that the
selection committee is selected at the same time. So we have
the selection committee each will have a term, starting meeting
B, ending meeting B next year.

ALAN GREENBERG:

My recollection is all of our selections for coming year, are in
fact, done in the prior year. I believe. I believe we do all of our
appointments prior to the Annual General Meeting. I believe
that is what our rules say. Therefore, the committee that has
been in place in a typical year, not this year, typical year, will
have been in place since the last Annual General Meeting, will
run through the end of the current one, and will be making the
recommendations to the ALAC for the next one.
So I think we’re in agreement using slightly different words. I
think.

Page 5 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

EN

If I can try, I guess that Tijani is suggesting that we decouple the
selection of the selection committee to the AGM, to allow that
everything done for the selection of others, is not done at the
same time. To [take up?] all of that, it’s why I suggest that we do
it at the B meeting to the B meeting, and not from the AGM to the
AGM. So that’s his proposal.
And I have a second point, but go ahead.

ALAN GREENBERG:

This proposal does decouple, because most of our selections,
according to our rules of procedure, are done prior to or at the
AGM.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

…that’s exactly what he saying. He doesn’t want to have, in
addition to do at the same time the selection committee,
because this year, of course, it’s now, but it’s written, selected,
annually, after AGM. That means at the same time at the AGM, in
fact.

ALAN GREENBERG:

No, it doesn’t. Sorry. When I say after the AGM, the AGM this
coming year will be November 3rd to 9th. The first task of the new

Page 6 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

group, of the first task in the fiscal year would be to create to a
point the selection committee meeting [CROSSTALK]…

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

…we have one proposal to do it at the B meeting, and you have
your proposal. Thank you. And I would like to add a second
point is that, I request that the [inaudible] stay in this
committee. That means that I suggest that chair is a non-voting
chair. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

This slide had what I thought we’d agree on, whether the chair
votes or not is not mentioned on this slide.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
I find it somewhat problematic to appoint a committee at a B
meeting, when a significant number of the people may not be in
office past the Annual General Meeting.

That is why I’m

selecting, suggesting, that we select it after the Annual General
Meeting, for the following year. One of the last tasks they will
perform will be recommendations for positions for the next
fiscal year.
Tijani.

Page 7 of 30

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

This is the last word I will say about this issue. The ALAC is
selecting ALT, the old ALAC is selecting the new ALT. So it is the
same. People are not in office, yes, they are not yet, the new one
are not in office. But you have the former one for the current
one.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Except selections that are made between December and June,
will be populated with people who may not be there anymore.
I’m happy…

Look.

Does everyone understand what the

differences are? I’m happy to see what the consensus of this
group is.
You’re allowed to. Okay, two options. It is the group is selected
annually, post-Annual General Meeting, not at, post by the new
ALAC, the new regional leaders, the new chairs, if there are new
chairs, option number one. Option number two is the selection
is made at or just after the B meeting.
We have… Quick show of hands of ALAC members. Vanda
wants to speak. Go ahead, Vanda.

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

Yeah, just to understand. When the selectees will take place,
when? In June?

Page 8 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Option number one says, and we have a speaker list. Option
number one is the call for members for both the ALAC and the
regional ones, will go out just after the Annual General Meeting.
Option number two, is the call will go out and be filled around
the B meeting. [CROSSTALK]

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

I’m not asking that. I’m just asking, when the selected person
will sit in the place?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Immediately after they’re selected.

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

So that’s why I understood Tijani said, they cannot be selected
and sit at the same time.

ALAN GREENBERG:

They will either… The group that will be selected, should there
be a selection soon after that selection, the new group will do it.
So in option one, the new group will start working around about
December of each calendar year. And will work until the next
group is selected a year later. Not for the starting states, the
starting state is starting now.

Page 9 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

Option number two is the group will be selected round about the
June meeting, and will take actions for all selection
recommendations until the next June meeting. I believe those
are the two options.
León, go ahead.

LEÓN SANCHEZ:

Thank you very much Alan. This is León Sanchez. I do see the
points in both options, and I think that maybe a middle ground
to actually find a solution to this is that we can select the
members of this committee at any point in time, be it meeting A,
B, C or whatever. But we need to have just the [inaudible] that
those selected should have the expectancy, at least, of being
seated in office to actually be eligible for the committee.
Because I do agree that we’ll have a problem if we select
someone that might not be sat at office while being at the
committee. So I guess the middle ground here is to say, okay,
whatever time we decide to select the committee, we just need
to add this [inaudible] of having those eligible to actually have
an expectancy or an actual possibility of being in office to be
eligible.

Page 10 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

That means, just to be clear, that anyone who is seated at an
Annual General meeting, be it NomCom or RALO, cannot
participate in this group. You are restricting it to a subset for
ALAC. Again, that’s an implication of that.

LEÓN SANCHEZ:

Just to follow-up, and this is León Sanchez again. I guess the
RALO [component?] wouldn’t be effected by this, because it will
be chosen by the RALO itself, according to their processes. So
that really wouldn’t pollute the process, I think. But what could
be a problem, indeed would be to select someone that is an
ALAC member at the time, and that wouldn’t be able to continue
to be seated in the ALAC, if selected.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Yeah, as I said, the only problem comes up with the ALAC
members, not the RALO members, and the problem is not that
the person will not be an ALAC member, which is problematic if
they go off, but any new people who come on, who are
appointed by the RALO or the NomCom, cannot, no matter how
experienced they are, they cannot take part in the process.

LEÓN SANCHEZ:

I would disagree, because if you say that, to be able to be
considered for the position, you should have an expectancy, or

Page 11 of 30

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

the possibility, a feasibility of actually being seated, then you
would include those ALAC members being selected by the
regions. So if we know that, for example, in our case, let’s
suppose that Humberto is going to be selected ALAC member,
and there is a pool of people within the RALO that are going to
compete for that ALAC seat, well any of those would be able to
be members of this committee, so far as they get confirmed as
ALAC member.
If they don’t, well then we should have a backup plan for that,
and that would be maybe a way forward.

ALAN GREENBERG:

As I said, I don’t care, but it does mean that we’re excluding
NomCom appointees, and potentially RALO appointees if the
process is not done very early. We have Seun and Sébastien.

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Yeah.

This is Seun for the record.

Thank you León for

mentioning the name during your speech.

Please, remote

participants, have not been identifying who has been speaking.
On my point, I think this appointees… I mean, the appointees
would be from AGM to AGM. I think we need to just look at
[inaudible] NomCom. The NomCom positions that we normally
seat, when do we seat them? And then, at what point…?

Page 12 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

I mean, who are those that they appoint, what time do they work
for?

ALAN GREENBERG:

All ALAC positions, other than for resignations, are seated after
the AGM until the, an AGM typically, two years later.

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Yeah. So if it does work for the NomCom seat, I think the same
thing as this, so we could still seat them at the AGM.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Okay. I think you’re agreeing. I think you’re selecting option
one. Thank you. Sébastien and then Judith.

SÉBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

I get the point of both of you. Maybe the solution could be that
the selection is apprised of the new ALAC and we decide that the
people are seated for the calendar year, from the 1st January to
the 31 December, whatever happen at the end of the AGM of the
year after. They stay onboard of this committee, and they will
be changed the 1st of January each year.
[Inaudible] the time we select, and the time they are in office,
and we have some time, and if there is something to run, we still

Page 13 of 30

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

have a committee running, and not, and the selection going of
this committee in parallel, if needed. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Slightly different timetable. So it’s option one, but they don’t
actually get seated until the January 1st of the year. Fine, thank
you. Judith?

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

This is Judith Hellerstein for the record. What… I don’t see why
we’re excluding NomCom, because NomCom lately, has been
doing two-year appointments.

And so, we would know…

They’re not one year appointments. And so we would… They
wouldn’t… We would know ahead of time, how long the term is,
it’s two years, and it’s the same with ALAC.
So I don’t see how León’s point… I think León… I agree with
León. I don’t think we’re excluding the NomCom. I think it’s
open, and I do like that we, that the selection committee gets
started a few months before they have to be appointed. This
gives us a selection committee some time to review the
applications, and discuss what, and have people review them,
before they vote, and figure out who is going to be the best
person to select.

Page 14 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

And I think that’s what we need. And I think we’re rushing the
process, if we plan in October, and there is too little time.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Okay. To be clear, I am talking about a case. For instance,
Jimmy’s term is up, we do not know whether Jimmy is
reapplying, and we certainly don’t know who will be selected.
Whoever occupies that seat, is not going to be eligible to sit on
the selection committee, because we will not know until very
shortly before the AGM, which is why I was suggesting it be done
after the AGM.
I really don’t care at this point, but we’re halfway through the
half hour, and we haven’t gotten through the points that I
thought were accepted. So I would like to take a show of hands.
We have three options on the table now. Let’s see if we can at
least narrow it down.
We have option number one saying the selection is done,
roughly at the B meeting, we have option number two, saying it
is done at the… Let’s do two options at a time. Option number
two saying the selection is done after the AGM, where we know
who is going to be seated for the next year, and we can then, if
that option is selected, we’ll talk about Sébastien’s offer.

Page 15 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

So, selection committee, selections are made and/or about the
at or about the B meeting in June, to run for one year, each year.
That’s option number one now. Sorry, I may have flipped the
order.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
I can flip them back again, but that would be more confusing.
Option one is basically what is suggested by Tijani, selection
committee is seated at or around the B meeting to sit for one
year. Okay? Some of those people may disappear halfway
through the year. I don’t even want to think about whether we
replace them or keep them. We can debate that later. Okay?
Option number two is the group is selected after the AGM. Are
there any questions of clarification first?

Seun.

Not a

clarification, that your card is up. Is there any questions that
require clarification before we take a show of hands or cards?
Tijani seems to want to intervene.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

I am so sorry to raise this point. I didn’t think that it would
consume all of this time. I agree with any solution you have.
[Inaudible] We are not in conflict, any solution. Please, please.

Page 16 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Tijani, you and I are in exact accordance right now. I want to
move on and make a decision, something we don’t seem to be
able to do all of that easily. So, I am calling the question. A
show of hands for the selection is made at or about the B
meeting.
ALAC members only please.
At or about the B meeting, for a term of one year.

SUEN OJEDEJI:

Do we have all of the ALAC members…

ALAN GREENBERG:

ALAC members only.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
I believe we have quorum here.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
A show of cards from ALAC members who believe the selection
committee should be appointed at or about the B meeting to
serve for one year. Hold them high so we can see them. Sorry, I
don’t know what I…
Let’s cancel today.

Page 17 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

Okay. Option A, we’re not going to use numbers anymore. The
committee is selected at or about the B meeting to serve for one
year. Show of cards. B meeting, June.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Option number two, the committee is selected at or about…
Sorry. [LAUGHTER]
Option B… Option B, it’s okay, he wants to vote twice. The
committee is selected after the AGM. He doesn’t care, he’s
saying, and for the record, if I had a card, I would be holding it up
now, because that is my preference. We have made a decision
people!
[CHEERS AND APPLAUSE]
So the wording that I put on there late last night is the one that
we have decided. So we don’t have to rewrite it. Next slide. I
hesitate until we come to the controversial decisions. Sorry. Ah,
second point. Sorry Sébastien. Thank you for pulling me back,
you do that job well when I forget things.
Option number two, does the committee, this new selection
committee, serve from the period when they are selected
through to the end of the year? There are typically very few
selections that are normally done at that point. This year may
well be different because we have about 14 reviews kicking off

Page 18 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

January 1st. So does it serve calendar year to calendar year,
which is unusual for us, or does it serve essentially AGM through
AGM?
Okay. Show of hands, calendar year. AGM to AGM. Decision
made. Thank you. Next slide. I hope someone is recording our
decisions.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Can someone run the cursor over so we can see all of the words?
We’re almost there. All right. Now don’t move the cursor again,
because next time they’re going to get erased. I don’t know why
that happens. Okay. ALAC member, two options. There is a
period, a bullet missing, but don’t try to get it. The bullet is on
the second line.
Two options, we simply say that the ALAC members are the ALT,
the arguments that were put forward on that is it’s a group
that’s already used to responding quickly. They work together.
We’ve already selected them because we trust them to act on
our behalf. The exception would be the Chair’s region. We’re
going to have to make a decision on whether the Chair is ex
officio or is in fact, one of the voting members.
The rational is, if the Chair acts as the member, then we have 20
people and always have the chance for a deadlock. And sadly,

Page 19 of 30

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

on these kinds of committees, we do have cases of deadlocks.
We have had real examples, I am told by the people who have
run these committees in the past.
The second option is, each region, the ALAC members get
together and decide who is going to serve on their behalf. It
might end up being the ALT member, it may be somebody else.
Preferences, do we have any discussion?

And again, we’re

running short of time, but if anyone wants to discuss. Sébastien.

SÉBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Just a question of clarification. If it’s an ALT member, I don’t
understand what is, except for Chair region, Chair’s region,
because they are not ALT member. And I don’t know…

ALAN GREENBERG:

ALT, the Chair of the ALAC, that’s the ALAC Chair, sorry. The
ALAC Chair. The first slide, we already decided the ALAC Chair
will preside over the group. The question is, is that the ALAC
member from the region, or is it an ex officio position? Or you
can give the same Chair two votes. One vote he votes as the
member, the other one he’s the non-voting Chair.

Page 20 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

SÉBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

EN

May I suggest that if it’s ALT, the Chair end up with one vote,
region balanced is preserved, and if there is, how you say? A
deadlock, the Chair has the final word. That means it’s just in
case of, and it’s not for the regular votes that the Chair of
[inaudible] vote I would say.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Sébastien, your skill is such that you’re always one slide ahead
of us. We’ll deal with the Chair, with the unique situation of the
Chair’s region separately. The concept is, do we simply say the
ALT, or do we want a decision among each of the five regions,
among the ALT members, to select the person.
First option, first bullet, we simply say it’s the ALT and one less
decision to make. These people are already in place. Show of
hands.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

I think you need to say, we are now voting. The first option is as
follows, put your cards up or not, because people next to me
were going, “What?” So I’m suggesting you might have missed a
few votes.

Page 21 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

I will make it clear what we are doing. We are now voting, it
seems to be a more expedient procedure than trying to reach
consensus in this group, since we have another half dozen
decisions to make in the next seven minutes.
It’s in the next zero minutes. The decision on the table right now
is we have two ways of selecting the ALAC members, half of the
committee, the ones who are sitting ALAC members. We can
simply say it is the ALT, people that we have already selected to
represent the regions, or we can make the decision a decision of
the ALAC members from each region, they can come to a friendly
decision, they may draw straws, I don’t care which.
That’s up to them to decide how they fight it out. Or we simply
pick the [inaudible]. Option one, we simply say it’s the ALAC.
Show of cards.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Yes, thank you.
Option number one, as shown on there, it is the ALAC members
that will serve on this committee are the ALT.
Sorry. Option two will be, but we’re not voting for it yet.

Page 22 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

EN

But please spell out the option two, so people who are voting
can compare.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Option two is the second line on the slide. That for each region,
the three ALAC members, in my case, me, Tim, and Garth, will
come together in a corner of a room, and will decide which of us
will serve on the selection committee for the coming year.
Option one, is it is the ALT member from each region who will
serve. So option one, it is the ALT member who will serve. You
want a clarification? A statement?
Names, Tijani, please.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Yes, Tijani speaking. Option one, means that the ALT that we
have already selected, will serve on the selection committee.
And that option two is that each three members of the region
that are on the ALAC, come together and choose one among
them to represent the region in the selection committee.
My point of view, I will tell it clearly, is that to be more bottom
up, we have already selected an ALT to manage, more or less,
the affairs of ALAC, and they are there. But also, it is better, in
my point of view, to have the members of the region to choose

Page 23 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

their representative. It might be the member of the ALT, it might
be another one. No problem.

ALAN GREENBERG:

But this committee is made up of 10 people, five selected by the
region, five selected as ALAC members. You are adding a third
option that the region selects which ALAC member?

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

I don’t add anything. Two options that you said, I repeated
them. That’s all.

ALAN GREENBERG:

I thought I heard you say something… Does anyone else want to
intervene, or may we have the selection? I don’t know. You’re
holding up because you want to intervene? Go right ahead.

SÉBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Sorry. And it will be short. A big difference from my point of
view, is the ALT, for the moment, it’s selected by the outgoing
ALAC, and if it’s done by the ALAC member it will be done with
the incoming ALAC. It’s why one of the reasons I support the line
two. Thank you.

Page 24 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Does anyone feel it necessary to explain why they’re, how
they’re going to vote? Or why they’re going to vote? Seeing no
hands, seeing no more interventions. Olivier.

OLIVIER CRÉPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much Alan. It’s Olivier Crépin-Leblond speaking.
And I don’t want to interfere with ALAC matters, but I was going
to ask if you would allow me to ask a question on this, that
might influence the vote though, on the way that I asked the
question.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Please go ahead. We don’t need the introduction.

OLIVIER CRÉPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you. Does this… If you choose option one, so the ALT
members will sit on the selection committee, does this mean
that none of the ALT members will be able to run for any
position that would be selected by the selection committee?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Page 25 of 30

No, it does mean that. We have a following slide on that.

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

OLIVIER CRÉPIN-LEBLOND: Okay, then how can you decide on this without seeing the
following slide?

ALAN GREENBERG:

The following slide says, anyone who chooses to run for a
position, will recuse themselves at the very beginning. And
suggest a replacement method. Are we ready to vote?
Can we have a show of hands or cards, held high so they can be
counted for those who feel the ALT, the people who are selected
by the ALAC, to represent, sorry, by the region…
By the ALAC, to represent the various regions, also act on the
selection committee.
I count five. Is that what staff counts?
Put your cards down, hands down. A show of cards or hands for
those who believe the ALAC members should decide amongst
themselves which one it is. It might end up being the ALAC
member, it might end up being someone else.
Our rules call for a number of ways to resolve the tie. Does
anyone have the rules ready?
We have quorum.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

Page 26 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

While I’m looking up the rule, León, you wanted to intervene?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Is there any ALAC member in the room who did not vote? Can
staff confirm we, in fact, have 10 ALAC members in the room?
Okay, thank you. Then bear with me for a moment while I find
the rules of procedure.
I will note, this is the first time we have ever had to refer to the
rules of procedure, on the fly, when we’re actually doing
business. But nevertheless, section number 12, page 18.
I wish I could remember, but I honestly do not have a clue.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
If she did not send a proxy, then we have no choice but to not do
anything about it.
All right. If a vote is taken, which results in a tie, the Chair, by
sole decision, may take any of the following solutions. Call for
additional discussion and a new vote of the ALAC. No time for
that. Immediately call for a new vote of the ALAC. Is anyone
prepared to change their vote right now?
Do I see anyone prepared to change their vote? Yes, no?
[SPREAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

Page 27 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

I’m asking, if we held this vote again, would anyone change their
mind? Therefore having a six to four. I see no hands. So I’m not
going to exercise that option, it would be a waste of time. If the
vote is part of a nomination or selection process, it is not. Cast
an additional vote, the Chair may cast an additional vote to
eliminate the tie.
This option may be exercised only by the ALAC Chair as opposed
to someone sitting in the position of the Chair. I will cast an
extra case, in that case. It’s the last of our options. Therefore,
we will do the ALT.
Next slide. Okay.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Thank you, I understand. I like to go over the next slide so you
see what is coming. We have a 15-minute slot, which may or
may not end up being there. This will be prepared. We are going
to look at how we handle a conflict of interest, that is, a
committee member who chooses to run for a position. Next
slide.
The decisions will be made by consensus, if possible, a majority
vote with the selection committee chair acting as a tie breaker, if
necessary. And there is one option to that, that is for the
recommendation of liaisons to ACs and SOs, the people who

Page 28 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

actually speak on behalf of the ALAC, and are formally mandated
to speak on behalf of the ALAC.
We have two options. The recommendation is made, if it needs
to come down to a vote, if there is no consensus otherwise, by
the ALAC members who are on the selection committee, or by
the entire selection committee. We’re not discussing it now, I’m
just reviewing it, so we’re prepared for the next session. Next
slide, if there is one.
We will have to have, decide in this meeting, how we select the
CSC liaison, which is not a liaison to an AC SO, but it happens to
be called a liaison so that’s just for the confusion of everyone.
And we’re going to have to agree on that timeline. Are there any
more slides? I don’t think there are.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
The CSC is a committee that reviews IANA’s performance with
respect to names function. It’s something we agreed to when
we approved the CWG recommendations several months ago.
We will come back to it and decide on those slides, at that time.
Tijani, do you have something to say regarding the process, not
the substance.
No, we’re not discussing this. I was, it was pointed out that it
would be a good thing to show people what slides are coming.

Page 29 of 30

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 1)

EN

I’ve just showed people what slides are coming. No discussion
on them. We are completed on this session. We will come back
to it later on in the process.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
All right. We are giving… Is it possible to give it… We are
already 10 minutes into the 30-minute session. We give a 10minute break, and come back on time, we have 10 minutes
before we start eating into the next session.
10-minute break, we will start, regardless of quorum, we will
start the discussion. So be back if you want to participate.
We’re not going to go backwards. 10-minute break now.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 30 of 30

