HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 09:15 to 09:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

OLGA CAVALLI:

I'm supposed to report to the GAC now? So I should repeat what
I said? That's a little bit strange.
So the working group has finished the session and I will report to
the GAC.
Very quickly, what I would like the GAC to have in mind is that
among your documents, you have the public interest document.
Please review it and give us your feedback. It could be good to
know if we are okay in sending it to ICANN, as a GAC
contribution, or some countries may be interested in sending it
as a contribution from certain countries.
The other thing that we have been discussing is the different
definitions of how to use the term of "relevant government" and
"internationally recognized governments," so for the GAC
information, I will summarize the comments and the transcripts
that we have from this meeting and I will present them to the
working group first and I can share them with the GAC if you -- if
it's needed what else we did.
What else we did. Help me.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

EN

We discussed the relevance of public interest.
As I said, there is a document about the use of three-letter codes
as TLDs. It's a very -- it's not a long document. It's among the
GAC material to be reviewed for this meeting. Please take a look
at it. It will be presented by Gema tomorrow. But the document
was prepared by the working group. So I think that that's all I
have to say.
Are there any comments from the audience about all we have
been doing and any comments towards our work in the next
months?
Mark, please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you very much, Olga. Mark Carvell, U.K. government.
Just a question. What is the deadline for comments on the
public interest paper? Could you remind me of that? Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Well, it was -- it is not a specific deadline. The idea was that the
GAC could review it. We have been sharing it for a while. But we
can have more time. But it's not a specific deadline. ICANN is
working on that on a continuous basis, so if we can have --

Page 2 of 7

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

EN

maybe perhaps for the next month, if you can send us some
comment. It's among the -By the way, we received comments from Finn and from Gema
and from other members of the working -I don't know if you're in the working group list? Are you? We can
include you so maybe you can have that feedback. But I can
send it to you as well. Thank you, Mark.
Jorge?

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you, Olga. My question would be a similar one. We have
seen the best practices slide, which I think is a very interesting
part of the discussions we have had in the working group, but I
was wondering if this part of -- of our work in the working group,
as it was taken out of the public interest document, whether it
will be subject to a consultation or -- because it would be good
to -- to start our work on a document. I don't know whether
within the working group as a start, and then to -- to go over to
the GAC list to really develop these best practices because they
could be very useful for coming rounds of new gTLDs. Thank
you.

Page 3 of 7

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

OLGA CAVALLI:

EN

Thank you, Jorge. I didn't take a lot of time for explaining the
best practices because we presented them in Dublin or before,
but it's good to share again with the GAC. And of course if we -- if
the -- if the working group agrees and the GAC agrees, we can
open them for public comments, as we did with the first draft
document.
You want to take the floor again?

SWITZERLAND:

Yes, very shortly.

I remember somehow that they were

presented at some GAC meeting, but I -- what I was intending to
say is that in order to -- to have them adopted at some future
moment of time as a GAC document, which may formally go into
the processes of the GNSO, for instance, on subsequent rounds,
it would be very good to make this a formal procedure of
discussing it in the working group and then afterwards in the
GAC.
Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Page 4 of 7

Thank you, Jorge. Very, very good comment. Ornulf.

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

NORWAY:

EN

Thank you, Olga. Just a question for clarification. I'm sorry of
being late in. So it's just a question on this. These comments
that you drafted on the -- on this issue, a (indiscernible), a straw
woman paper on the protection of three-letter codes for toplevel domain. Has that been forwarded? Or when or will it be
forwarded into that process? So it's just that I haven't really
seen that's been forwarded or not. So just for a question.
Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Sorry, I'm not sure I understood the question. The document
has been forwarded to the whole GAC. It's among the GAC
documents to be used in this meeting.
Is that your question?

NORWAY:

Yes. Yes, I've seen it on the GAC list. But my question is, actually,
will we or has it been forwarded into the process in the CrossCommunity Working Group?

Or that's probably what we're

going to discuss here or not.
Because my question was that specifically because, also, there
was no mention of that into the draft communique that we got
on the -- on the GAC list. So that was why my question.

Page 5 of 7

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

EN

Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Ornulf. As I said, it will be presented tomorrow. If
you can help me with the communique drafting, is it included in
the communique draft or -- I think that's the idea; right?
Okay. We will discuss that tomorrow and it's up to the GAC to
include it.
Thank you, Tom.
Are we done?
Okay. Any other comments?
Okay.

Thank you very much.

I will summarize all these

comments. I will share them with the working group list.
If some of you are interested in participating in the working
group, just let me know, let Julia know, and she will include your
email address. And I will summarize all the comments received,
and I will take your suggestions to move forward the work in this
working group, and thank you very much.
Who got the award? I want to know.
[ Applause ]
Who got the award?

Page 6 of 7

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Presentation to the GAC

EN

Thank you, but who got the Ethos Award? I missed that.
Thank you very much to all of you.
[ Applause ]

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 7 of 7

