HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce
Thursday, June 30, 2016 – 08:00 to 09:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

ARIEL LIANG:

Hello, this is Ariel Liang. Is that Corinna or Mark on the bridge? If
so, can you just say something and we can confirm you’re
connected.

MARK SEGAL:

Yes, Mark is here.

CORINNA ACE:

Corinna’s here.

ARIEL LIANG:

Thank you so much. Welcome.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay, good morning, and good afternoon and good evening for
any of the – after the echo goes. There wasn’t two of me.
This is the Dev Anand Teelucksingh, Chair of the At-Large
Technology Taskforce. Welcome to our At-Large Technology
Taskforce session at ICANN 56 Helsinki. We managed to squeeze

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

in some short time early in the morning here in Helsinki, but we
do have a packed agenda and actually from some very
interesting items to show and discuss.
So let’s us go right to our slides. And just to give a brief
background as to the At-Large Technology Taskforce –
Next slide. Next. Next slide. And next slide.
Right. So just to give a background behind what the At-Large
Technology Taskforce does, we review Information and
Communication Technologies that helps At-Large better able to
accomplish their role in ICANN activities. It’s open to anyone
that’s interested in ICT and how they can be applied to solve the
needs of the At-Large and other ICANN communities.
Next slide.
And the next slide just simply shows some of our links here. We
meet mostly once a month. Sometimes we have two calls a
month, and we have a wiki space and a workspace where we
document all of our activities. And if, again, anyone wanting to
join can e-mail At-Large Staff.
Next slide.
So we have an update on Technology issues. So for those
attending, we have a Technology Issues wiki page. And what we

Page 2 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

do is seek to track possible technology related issues and for
raising with ICANN staff. We’re just going to focus on two issues
that we see some significant updates since ICANN 55 in
Marrakech. And that’s making Adobe Connect recordings more
accessible by having those recordings available in MP4 format.
And our LACRALO mailing list issues. Judith?

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

Yes. This is Judith Hellerstein, also a co-Chair of the Technology
Taskforce. And we’ll also be talking about hopefully some
improvements to Adobe Connect that will enable it to be better
used by people who are on mobile devices, which has been a lot
of problems for our community is that they can’t see certain
functions that we use on Adobe on mobile devices. So hopefully
we’ll get an update on that as well.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Judith. Okay, so let’s move to the next slide.
Just to give some background behind Adobe Connect
recordings. Adobe Connect is the conferencing solution used by
ICANN and all of the ACs and SOs, for all of the face-to-face
sessions, for remote participation, and all of the working group
calls. And while you could record the entire session of Adobe
Connect, one key problem is that it requires Adobe Flash to play

Page 3 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

back those videos. And for those on mobile devices, they simply
cannot have access to those recordings. And also, even if you
have a PC with adobe Flash installed, the experience of playing
back Adobe Connect recordings is very cumbersome. It’s almost
like you have to download the entire video which is sometimes
like 200 MB. So if you don’t have a fast enough connection, you
have to wait half a minute sometimes and then you’re able to
start playing back. And then jumping ahead sometimes also very
– a lot of pauses. So there is that.
The third thing is that if you’re trying to do outreach and
engagement and telling people to install Adobe Flash, the Adobe
Flash plug-in is, I would say it requires lots of updates. It’s not
very secure. There have been numerous security flaws, I’m sure
literally dozens I think within the past year alone. And if you’re
not keeping up to date, your PC, Windows, or Mac is vulnerable
to be hijacked by malware. So that’s a big issue. Satish?

SATISH BABU:

Thank you, Dev. Now that Adobe Connect itself is based on
Flash. So having Flash itself is not necessarily a big issue. The
real issue is that Flash itself is kind of a dead end. For a
sustainable kind of a future we can’t depend on Flash. We might
have to think of other options. Although I feel that this trouble is

Page 4 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

actually temporary. It might get resolved. But what is the
alternative to flash itself?
And also, people like us who are using Linux, you didn’t mention
it at all. So just pointing that out.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Satish. Regarding using Linux, that has also been
historically a challenge. Literally, the only workaround you have
now is to use Google Chrome which has a built in Flash player.
Because Adobe itself is not updating the Linux plug-in. So the
Adobe Flash plug-in for Linux is no longer… you can’t use it
anymore to connect to Adobe Connect sessions and recordings.
So that’s really the only workaround.
And I agree with you. I think we’re seeing, given the prevalence
of mobile, we’re seeing the use of Flash less and less. And there
are two new technologies that we’re looking at that’s coming up
that’s available in many of the conferencing solutions we’ve
been testing – HTML 5 and something called WebRTC, which is a
[inaudible] to allow audio and video communication through
your browser without a plug-in.
Josh, welcome. I see you enter the room.
So going back to the thing regarding Adobe Connect recordings,
next slide.

Page 5 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

So what we did was that, based on the suggestions given by the
Technology Taskforce, ICANN has configured their Adobe
Connect accounts to allow for the ICANN staff to export the
Adobe Connect recordings to MP4 format. So the MP4 format is
playable on mobile devices. And what was currently ongoing
right now is for staff to test the process to convert Adobe
Connect recordings to MP4, that’s one, and to upload to video
sharing sites such as YouTube. And we have done one such
recording and the link is there in the presentation.
So I guess what I’d like to do is perhaps ask staff for an update. I
think one of the challenges was that the MP4 recording worked
well as a stand-alone file, but uploading an MP4 file to YouTube
was a challenge.

ARIEL LIANG:

In terms of the challenge when we upload the MP4 file, is that
the length of the video just doubled itself without any
prewarning and now we have to manually cut the video into half
so that it’s the original length. And if Josh or anybody else can
give some insights that would be really helpful.

Page 6 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

JOSHUA BAULCH:

EN

My name is Josh Baulch. I’m with ICANN staff. I manage the
Meetings Technical Team. I actually have a couple of updates
that I think you guys will all be very pleased with.
The first one is actually probably the biggest announcement.
The issues with Adobe Connect have not fallen on deaf ears from
our standpoint, and we have seen it within our own meetings
within ICANN. So what we had been working with is a company
called Connect Solutions. The way Adobe works is you either
have an adobe hosted, which is directly with Adobe, or you can
actually have the platform hosted with a different company but
you have control over the servers. The cost difference in doing
that is actually pretty significant, but we had enough issues that
I felt that it was worthwhile to do so.
As of Wednesday, the Executive Team approved moving forward.
So as of September we actually will be migrating over to our
own server cluster so we’re not sharing it with anybody else. This
will help us also solve a lot of the other issues that you guys
have, because when we were on Adobe hosted, we actually
don’t have control of the servers. We’re on a cluster with
everybody else so we get the standard package that everybody
else gets.
So in this case, we will be able to customize things, so we’ll be
able to customize pods. So one of the top priorities that I have is

Page 7 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

the chat pod being able to do multiple languages, being able to
do multiple languages within the captioning, so there’s a lot of
things that we’re able to do. Now it’s not going to be immediate
because it’s going to take us a little time to get everything up
and going.
So the one impact that it will have on the community is that we
have to change our subdomain. So right now we all go to
icann.adobeconnect.com. So after lengthy discussion internally,
we will be going to participate.icann.org. And the reason that we
decided to do away with referencing Adobe is because any time
down the future if we decide to go to a different platform we
don’t want to be beholden to the name. So we decided to make
it something that’s generic so that we can just transfer that
subdomain to something else and move on.
A couple of things to address directly with the Flash issue. I did a
conference call with Adobe directly, and because this is a really
big issue for a lot of customers not just us. So Adobe actually has
40 million customers. Of that, 63% are Windows, 24% is other – I
don’t know how they classify that – 11% is Apple, 1.3% is
Chrome Operating System, and then less than .5% is Linux users.
Now you know why they don’t help us much.
What their future plan is – and we’re hoping within the year to
resolve this issue – but what their plan is, so the Adobe add-in –

Page 8 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

and if you guys don’t use the Adobe add-in, I really encourage
you to use it because it is not Flash-based – so what they’re
going to do is they’re going to make the webpage so when you
load it, it will try to load Flash automatically. But if your browser
has flash blocked or if you have chose to not have Flash, then it
will roll to the next thing. It’ll try to get your add-in. If your add-in
doesn’t load, then it will load HTML 5.
I saw a demo of it. It is, the experience for the user, is
significantly different on HTML 5. The Adobe room looks
different. It still has the same layout, but it is I would say a
cleaner look. You still have close to the same functionality on it.
So from that standpoint, that’s a positive. We do have the option
from ICANN’s perspective, that we can actually force the add-in
to be used by everybody. We have not chose to do this because I
have a little bit of a problem with in the standpoint of, if
somebody is an Apple user and they want to monitor more than
one Adobe room, it doesn’t launch more than one application.
So you can only watch one room. So if I turn that feature on, it
just blocks and says you can’t do it. So it will not play in a web
browser from that perspective. So it’s something that I don’t
really feel comfortable with doing.

Page 9 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

I have talked to them about that. They recognize that is a
problem, so they are trying to address that for the Apple users to
be able to launch multiple rooms.
One other positive note that staff will probably more appreciate
is when we migrate over to the hosted solution with Connect
Solutions, that we will be able to have a monitoring tool that a
staff member – so like a Technical Support person – can monitor
30 Rooms at once. You’ll see in the chat pod you’ll see a little
Technical Support tab that you can click on and say, “Hey, I’m
having this problem in my Adobe room,” the Technical person
can jump in, correct it, and then jump back out so that they can
monitor multiple rooms. Right now we only have the option to
physically watch each of the rooms and in most cases, you can’t
really do more than two or three at a time.
Yes, so that’s kind of the high level of really where we’re going
with Adobe, so I’m really pleased about that. That will happen
within the next 60-90 days that we’ll be rolling that over. So as
soon as we get back – most ICANN staff are not aware of this
rollover just because it just happened – but because you guys
have been so instrumental in helping us get this far, this is
something that I felt you guys needed to know.

Page 10 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks for that, Josh. I think I have to say very positive steps,
especially with the custom pods. Because I think especially
things if you have chat that can do translation and so forth,
those are big steps. I think I see… Okay, Judith?

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

Thanks, Josh, for this great update. So I guess the question is,
what you’re saying is from what we have here who do
translation, right now they have to call in through the Adigo line.
So is that what you’re saying, is that we could then… Is the
audio only that or…?

JOSHUA BAULCH:

So there’s a couple of things. So with the transcript, that still
requires a live person. So there’s still going to have to be
somebody on the line for that. But the language translation –
basically they’re utilizing Google Translate – so then on that
transcript you can select which language you want.
Now the interesting thing about that when we talked about that
– the company that developed it is called eSync – when they
develop it, it’s not word for word translation. It is actually
phrase. So there may be a slight lag in what you’re seeing
because it’s actually taking the phrase that’s in English and then
translating it. Because word for word translation doesn’t get you

Page 11 of 46

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

anywhere.

You

get

things

that

aren’t

comprehensible

necessarily.
The question about listening to the different languages, that is
something that I brought up. They do not have an immediate
solution to it right now, but it is something that they’ll work with
us on and try to help resolve.
One of the other things that will be a big improvement is we can
actually do peering sessions with the phone providers directly,
which will significantly help the audio quality. Because right now
when you do a phone call it’s routing through who knows where.
So this way we have three providers and we’ll be able to do
peering session with at least two of those providers. Verizon will
be the only one that we probably won’t be able to do a peering
session with.

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

So clarification, so that means the people who call in… Because
I think what we have right now when we have our language
service, we have our own translation, I guess this would be
mostly on the RALO calls where we have French and Spanish
translation. So they have the interpreters like they are next door.
People call in because we have to set the Adobe audio to only
one thing. So would we be able then to split the audio – that’s
one question – split the audio in that.

Page 12 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

And the other thing is you said the pods. So if in the future when
we’re expanding our captioning, we could have different pods in
different languages. We could have one pod for the English and
one pod for Spanish to load on it. But they could also be the
same text streams.

JOSHUA BAULCH:

So one, to address the last question – no, it would actually still
be one pod. You would select what language you want to read it
in. So just to save on space.
And sorry, you have to remind me on your first question.

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

The first question was, currently the process is people call in on
Adigo because the audio is selected by the Adobe.

JOSHUA BAULCH:

Right. And this is a question that I’ve asked the company. Right
now there is not a solution to that so that within Adobe you can
pick what language you want to listen to. Right now that’s not
an option. But they did not say that it was not possible to not be
able to do it. It’s not something, like I said, we have a list of
things we need to get through first but it is still on the list. But I
think that we will be able to address that.

Page 13 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

And part of this, too, I need to say is that all of the customization
does cost money. So part of that will be making sure that we can
get the money to be able to do the additional features.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks, Josh. That is very interesting news and perhaps
we could take that discussion to our TTF mailing list, because I
think there’s other question we could probably ask on it.
I see there’s a queue. Okay. Past three persons. Keep the
interventions short. We do have a packed agenda. Satish?

SATISH BABU:

I’m very happy to hear about the developments on Adobe
Connect. I would like to point out also that when you look at the
intermediate maybe three years and later, HTML 5 becomes a
very strong contender because of the fact that it is not
dependent on any third party plug-in module [inaudible]. And
when you travel we can be in any cyber café without any
reservations that they must have the plug-in and so on. So it
really liberates us if you focus on HTML 5 for the future. Thank
you.

Page 14 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

JOSHUA BAULCH:

EN

Just follow up on that. Adobe is dragging their feet about it. I’m
not going to lie about that. Flash is their product. They know
that it’s on its death bed. The one thing that I will say that they
state is that their HTML 5 is still problematic because HTML 5
does not address video natively. There actually are APIs that
they have to install – webRTC – to get process… so they are
fighting a little bit of that because they aren’t able to do what
they can with video quality that they can with flash. They’re kind
of dragging their feet on that because HTML 5 has not been fully
embraced by everybody yet, and so they’re still kind of waiting.
But they are moving forward with it. The add-in is not Flash
anymore. The mobile is not Flash so they had to move forward
with it anyway.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay, thanks. Olivier?

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yes, thank you very much, Dev. You said there were several
providers for dial in and call out and so on. I knew that there was
a time when there was some kind of a policy to move people
from Adobe and Verizon to the system which worked directly
with Adobe Connect where you would issue yourself a dial out
on Adobe Connect. Was any thought given about people that
were not going to be on Adobe Connect and needed a dial out,

Page 15 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

because I’ve noticed in some cases you need to either get a
friend of yours or someone to be in front of a computer or some
kind of a tablet to get the dial out done and when it drops,
sometimes it’s also difficult.

JOSHUA BAULCH:

No, I appreciate the question. And it was addressed in the initial
thought process behind that. Really where we thought that that
would work was whoever’s managing the room, because they
can do dial outs to people within the room. However, what
wasn’t really taken into consideration is a lot of time those staff
are tied up with other things and they’re not able to do it.
And I’ve also experienced, too, like when we were in Tunisia we
have a hard time getting Tijani connected because when you’re
going through various phone providers sometimes they just
don’t respect dial outs because a lot of times they’ll block them
because they think they’re auto-robo-calls or whatever.
So we have not pushed as hard to get everybody over. Really it
came down to a massive cost difference in cost. So ICANN, right
now, we spend about $1.5 million in conferencing – just in calls
alone, nothing else other than that. We spend about $800,000 of
that on Verizon. Verizon is our most costly customer. Adigo
would be second. But we have chose to keep all of the groups
that do a lot of languages – interpreted calls – on Adigo because

Page 16 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

of the customer service that they provide. And we have
renegotiated that contract to try to help get it more in
comparable with the other providers.
Interestingly enough, Adigo actually offers the same thing that
PGI does, that does the auto dial outs. We haven’t pushed it in
any of the groups but it is available. The reason that we haven’t
pushed it is because it has to be a different set of dial in
numbers, and right now I don’t want to muddy the waters with
that.
But it is something available and maybe when we switch over to
the new platform with Adobe, that it might be something we can
encourage some groups to use. Because then in that case then
you have the best of both worlds. We have the auto dial outs.
But you can also have an operator join your call as well.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks, Josh. I do know we have other items on the
agenda. I know, Seun, is there something – is it a very quick
intervention, or can it wait? Thanks. James? Okay, thanks. Let’s
move ahead to the next point regarding the LACRALO mailing
list.
The problems of the LACRALO mailing list has been well
documented at that link. We’ve submitted a budget proposal to

Page 17 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

fix the bugs in the ICANN’s machine translation tool used for the
LACRALO mailing list for FY17, and it was taken as not a priority
with the new ICANN staff coming on board, Mark Segal and
Corinna Ace, the Product Manager who are now treating the
issue more formally. I believe what has happened is that a call
has gone out for a developer to help fix the remaining bugs. I
don’t know if Mark or Corinna could give update on that?

MARK SEGAL:

Yes, we’re still looking for that developer. We’ve had a little bit
more success in getting some candidates at least over the last
couple weeks. We were really narrowing our search for a while
there and weren’t getting a lot of candidates popping up. So
we’ve since changed what we’re looking for and we’re starting
to get a lot of candidates to come in. And once Helsinki is
through, we’re going to go through another round of interviews
and hopefully we’re going to get somebody here in the next
couple weeks.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay. Thanks, Mark. And again, I think we look forward – and the
whole LACRALO community – looks forward to seeing somebody
getting hired to push this and fix this longstanding problem.

Page 18 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

Okay, seeing no updates we can then move on to our next slide
and our next update.
And this is something regarding the at-Large website metrics. I
believe this is something Corinna will be speaking about? So
Corinna, could you take the floor?

CORINNA ACE:

Hi, yes. This is Corinna Ace. That’s correct. Ariel, is the slide up,
going to be shared? Okay. Upload’s in progress.
Thank you, Dev. Thanks for your introduction and everyone for
having me at the Technology Taskforce Meeting today. I’m
Corinna. I’m part of the Product Management Team at ICANN.
I’ve had the opportunity to support on recent updates to the AtLarge site. It’s been a great experience, but I’m joining you today
as Dev said because another part of my role at ICANN is focused
on website analytics.
So with that, I’d like to show you just a one page slide of
basically some recent activity on the At-Large site – specifically
in the four months after the new site launch – how that looks
compared to measurements from the same time last year.
And so I’ll note that a couple of the recent numbers – mainly
through the page views – are inflated due to increased traffic

Page 19 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

right after the launch. But even with this in mind, overall data
shows a really positive trend and improvement in use of the site.
So taking a look at the first metric, we have sessions – so the
number of times users are actively engaged with the site over a
time period. The number of sessions on at-Large has increased
about 84% year over year. That’s a noticeable uptick in site
activity.
Visitors – the number of users who initiate at least one session
within the state range – has also increased by about 22%. So
during this timeframe last year there were about 2,500 users
who initiated a session compared to over 3,100 in the timeframe
this year.
Our page views have increased significantly. But as I mentioned,
this is also the data most inflated by our launch traffic. In fact,
page views in the first week after the launch account for about
40% of all the page views I collected data on during this
timeframe. So that’s declined and after activity died down a
little bit and leveled out. And so isolating the most recent data
shows that the average page views now is steadily about double
the monthly average views as the same time last year.
So this is still a really good early indication of moving traffic
away from the wiki and over to the new site, and it’s a metric
we’ll continue to track as time goes on.

Page 20 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

Our visit duration which is the average length of sessions across
the timeframe has more than doubled from year over year. So it
was a little under three minutes last year and it’s shown as a
little over six minutes this year. So this is a noteworthy increase
of engagement, suggests that more users are finding parts of the
site relevant and spending a longer time engaging with and
accessing information.
And the pages per visit – this is another engagement indicator –
and the average number of pages viewed during this time has
also increased, almost double. It went from around 2.7 pages to
5.3 pages this year. So it’s a good sign to see that users are
visiting on average almost twice as many pages per session
recently.
And our bounce rate – the percentage of single page visits- has
decreased by 16%. So the timeframe last year our average was
around 62% compared to around 52% this year. So the decline
in percentage of visits that bounce is another good trend in
performance and engagement.
And then just some more recent looks at audience and top
viewed content – this, our breakdown of users is about 45% new,
about 55% returning. And in the same timeframe in 2015 we had
a somewhat higher percentage of new users. So this is

Page 21 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

something to still track, but recent data may suggest that we’re
retaining more first time visitors than in the past.
And then the language chart here is based on the browsers that
are used to access the site. So the primary language [received]
English, but we do see some traffic from browsers set to each of
these languages shown here, if that’s not too small – English,
Spanish, French, Chinese, Russian, Arabic, Portuguese.
And then just to look at our recently top viewed page – next to
the home page which was the majority of the views in this list,
not too far behind is our Policy News pages, ALS lists and RALO
lists, the ALAC page, and pages with – I thought it was positive to
see – pages with information about getting involved and joining
the community.
So again, this is just a kind of brief overview summary of how the
site is doing and I think we have some pretty positive results
here, some good trends and improved engagement overall. And
I think it will be really interesting to continue tracking these
metrics on the site and see how we fare over time.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Corinna. One question I might just ask about is, are you
tracking how many people are accessing us on mobile devices
versus desktops?

Page 22 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

CORINNA ACE:

EN

That is something that we can track. I did not include that here,
but I can actually get that information for you specifically and
follow up with you.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay, thanks. I think one thing we want to find out is how many
people are using their mobile device to follow the activities of AtLarge versus regular desktops. And given the increasing use of
mobile devices I think it’s more important for mobile users to be
able to follow our activities and participate in our activities.
Any questions? Go ahead and please introduce yourself.

MIKHAIL MEDRISH:

Thank you. Mikhail Medrish, EURALO. I suppose it’s interesting to
understand if it is possible to know the percentage in between
regions of the world from where the users are going to our site.
Thank you.

CORINNA ACE:

I agree and that is something else we can look into is the
locations, percentage breakdown by region. Which again, great
feedback and it’s something we didn’t get here but I make note
of that and it’s something to follow up on. Thank you.

Page 23 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Corinna. Thanks and an excellent suggestion. Okay,
thank you, Corinna, for this. And let’s move on to our next item
on our agenda.
Next slide. Okay we’re loading back the slides from the previous
session. Right.
And this is now something, an update, on one of the
recommendations from ATLAS II. Just a quick summary of what
ATLAS II was. It was a list of recommendations the At-Large
community gave to us about a year and a half ago, and one of
the recommendations was Recommendation #31 that ICANN
and the ALAC should investigate the use of simple tools and
methods to facilitate participation in public comments and the
use of crowdsourcing.
So we have looked at a few of those tools over the past year. We
looked at Lumio and KAVI and we have recordings on our TTF
workspace on that, and we found both of those tools lacking.
And one of the things that we are going to be looking at is a tool
such as group chat, applications such as Slack. And what we’ve
heard is the NCUC have been actually trialing a chat solution
that has some group chat features. And we are very lucky to
have James Gannon and Rafik Dammak from the NCUC to help
speak about the group chat application.

Page 24 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

James, Rafik, welcome. Perhaps you could take the floor and
just explain what you have done.

JAMES GANNON:

Thank you. Just waiting for my slides to come up. Excellent.
So probably about two or three months ago we decided that we
really needed to have some form of real-time collaboration
because at the end of the day, the technology is moving along
and we went out and we started having a look at the various
things in the marketplace and we’ll see what we ended up
coming up to for a number of different reasons.
The first thing we were looking at is for our members and I think
would go for your members as well is how do we currently work
together at ICANN? And we noticed that it’s mostly through
these mailing lists. And it looks boring and it doesn’t look good.
This is not a good way to work, really.
So we went out and we were like, “Well, how does the rest of the
world actually work? “ And it’s using stuff like this – people use
Snapchat and WhatsApp and Kick and Twitter. But we were
looking at these and going, “Okay, but our discussions are
generally a little bit more structured than that.” So the obviously
one that you come to is Slack. It’s one of the most popular things
are structured team-based discussions.

Page 25 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

But the thing is, Slack costs a bit. And you can see, depending on
what you need from Slack, it’s up to $12.50 per user. So we
worked out, we looked at our figures, and who is active and who
is not. And we thought, probably somewhere around maybe 100
active users a month. So at $12.50 per person that’s $1,250 a
month. We ain’t that rich.
This is Slack, and this is what Slack looks like. So this is what we
would get for our $1,250 a month. What if I said that we can take
that $1,250 and put a decimal place in it? This is RocketChat
which is an open source version of Slack. And all-in including
hosting and everything else, this costs around $12.50 per month
for 100 users, not per person. And just going between these two,
you can see how incredibly similar they are.
So it’s an open source version of Slack. It’s very, very, similar.
And it does require a little bit of admin experience and you do
need somebody there to manage it. And it’s extremely low cost
comparatively. We personally host it on a Cloud solution. We
have it on Amazon Web Services. It has extremely strong security
encryption features. And I’m extremely proud to be able to say it
has an A+ rating on SSL Labs which is very, very, difficult to get.
Of particular interest to us, and I think to you guys as well, is that
there no – well, provided that you don’t host it in the U.S. – there
is no export control so there is no OFAC impact. So we have no

Page 26 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

issues with members from Sudan, Iran, or any other sanction
bearing countries connecting to this. And that’s something that
you’d have seen with Adobe, it’s something that you would see if
you went with the Slack solution because they are a U.S. based
company. They have to comply with OFAC. So yes, it seemed like
a best case scenario. Even taking out the cost impact it just
seemed like the most logical solution to us.
So the two biggest issues that we have found are, obviously
being a very open group, there is no public archiving solution.
And this is something that we need for our purposes, but also
other companies that are looking to actually replace Slack and
that work in compliance based environments such as financial
services or healthcare also need this feature. So a couple of us
who are using this solution have chipped in some money and we
actually have a $1,000 bounty for this feature to be added to
RocketChat. So there’s two devs actually working on this
actively to try and get that bounty. So that is something that we
will have very soon.
The internationalization support is there. The product can be
done in multiple languages and the product can be done in
multiple scripts. There is obviously no in-built translation or
anything else but you can have chat rooms in various scripts and
various languages, but I would still deem it as slightly immature.
It’s not very mature internationalization-wise, but that is again

Page 27 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

something that is being actively developed on, so they’re going
in the right direction.
And for the more techie people, it uses Meteor – It’s using Blaze
on the frontend, the actual code is a [mix of] CoffeeScript from
Java, and it runs on MongoDB – so it’s really, really, modern
technology. This is not basing itself on anything old school. And
this is good because there’s a lot of active development on it
then, and we’re not relying on people with some esoteric
knowledge from many years ago. It’s really active.
On the more infrastructure side, it has Sandstorm and Docker
support. We are running it on Docker. There are native desktop
apps. There are native mobile apps. There are native Linux apps.
There are apps for pretty much any platform you can think of.
And it supports voice and video chat you do using WebRTC. It
supports person-to-person direct messaging using off-therecord messaging which is an extremely secure encrypted
messaging, which is I feel very important. And there is an API.
There is support for chatbots which is a big feature of Slack. So
you can automate a lot of things. You can add RSS feeds that a
bot will go off and find out things about and then bring it back.
And there you can use web hooks to hook into third party
services that can then update your channel with various bits of
information that you want it to do. And, as I said, there are

Page 28 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

localizations for various languages. I think there is about 30
languages supported natively with more being actively
developed.
So this is what our instance looks like. I had a conversation with
Glenn and Dev that possibly a demo today is probably not the
best idea, but what we can do is if you’re interested I can come
onto one of your Taskforce calls and we can do an actual,
proper, full-on demo. But essentially if you know what Slack
looks like, it looks like this. I’ve seen apart from maybe some of
the third party plug-ins that Slack has, this essentially gives us
exactly the same features for the cost of $12.50 Euro a month.
And I haven’t seen anything that is pushing me back towards
Slack.
For some reference, we launched about six to eight weeks ago.
We have 50 active users – like, class active users, people that are
using it multiple times a day. For the pilot phase we identified it
as the primary chat tool for Helsinki. So we all know we have
WhatApps groups, we have Skype channels, we have all of this,
but we said, “No, look. For Helsinki.” Number one, this is the new
meeting format anyway, so we thought it was a good time to
say, “Okay, let’s see if this works.”
We’ve had a couple of hiccups that people floating back over to
Skype channels and other things. But it’s actually worked quite

Page 29 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

well. We have people chatting on it. I checked it just there a
moment ago. We have about 3000 – 4000 messages during the
Helsinki meeting. So it’s been actively adopted because of its
Slack-like interface. People are quite comfortable using it. The
adoption was pretty good.
Some feedback if you do decide to go down this route. In your
early days, do your planning really, really, well. I kind of failed on
that and it caused us hiccups. Do extensive testing because
there are some things around the internationalization that I
discovered so if people want to put in their names using, for
example, Arabic script, that’s something that you need to be
very careful on how you do some of the configuration settings.
Make sure that you have everything ready to go before you start
putting your members on it. Do a pilot internally with a small
team. Try and break it. Mess with your config settings. Make sure
everything is the way you want it before you release it to the
more general public.
But I have to say it’s worked quite well and the members that
I’ve talked to anyway are pretty happy with it. And I would
recommend that you guys look into it. I’m perfectly happy
obviously to help you guys out with that. For the record, I am an
At-Large member so it’s all kosher. I’m quite happy for questions
or anything that people want to ask.

Page 30 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, James. Very interesting stuff.
I see there’s immediately a queue. Olivier Crepin-Leblond.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you very much, Dev. As far as Slack was concerned, we
did some extensive – some testing, I can’t call it so extensive –
but we certainly did some testing on it and of course the cost is
one of the big question marks on this. So it’s great to see
something that’s open source, something that is I would gather
free to some extent – even the domain name? Because I’ve
noticed it’s ncuc.chat. Is that paid for or is that included in the
free package?

JAMES GANNON:

That was my contribution to it. I felt that we talk a lot about all
of our new gTLDs but I thought we should, in the words of
Google, eat our own dog food.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Thank you. If I can follow up. So you broke the bank on this one
and are supporting ICANN financially. That’s great to see parts of
ICANN doing that. The ALAC doesn’t do this. We usually ask for

Page 31 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

money from ICANN. We don’t do it the other way around. But
anyway. Let’s strike this part from the record, please.
I had a question on – you mentioned also there no more Skype.
Do you mean that Skype people have moved from Skype and
move on to that, or is it that no more Skype as in Skype doesn’t
work if you run that?

JAMES GANNON:

Thanks, Olivier. No, it’s that I think we all probably have our big
Skype channels that we all chat on and we said that for this
meeting that those channels we wanted them to go dark and we
wanted to focus on trying to use this tool. Because when you
have a group of people that are used to using one form of
communication, the change management journey to get them
to go to a new tool can be very difficult. So we said, “This is the
Policy Forum. It’s a new meeting style. Let’s do the experiment
with this at the same time and try and see, do we get the
adoption on the new tool.”

OLIVIER CREPIN LEBLOND: Thanks, James. And so I think it would be really great if we could
have your feedback once this meeting is finished and see if it’s as
easy to use as Skype. Because we certainly do use Skype
channels. The great thing about the Skype channels is if you get

Page 32 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

a few people together and it’s so easy to add people to the
channel, get people in, out, and so on, and it’s great. At the same
time you can have your own channel. It’s not like a case of all the
channels are public, so if I just want to speak to Dev and to Ariel,
we’ve got our little thing. If it’s as flexible and as stable as well,
which I guess is the other thing, then super.
I didn’t quite understand one thing. You said that it was working
on many different platforms. But I didn’t quite understand
whether these were you needed separate software to install on
the platform or not. Because that’s the other thing. Some people
access this from their work and have very stringent things on the
ports that are being used and on the installation of software on
their laptops.

JAMES GANNON:

So just going into a little bit of the tech stuff beside it. So it
presents itself as a web interface that comes over port 443 for
normal SSL, and it can also come over port 80 for unencrypted.
And both the beauty of it is that it presents a web API that a
number of desktop applications can also call to. So while you
can always use just the web interface which just looks like a
website so you’re safe to get through corporate firewalls and
everything else, you can also use a native app on pretty much
any platform that you can think of. I think they support

Page 33 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

14platforms. They support Linux, Blackberry, Nokia, N-Gage,
N5s. If you can think of it, it probably has a native application.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, James. I see there’s a queue here still. Okay.

MIKHAIL MEDRISH:

I would like to understand if it is possible to look somewhere at
the list of requirements and something like checkbox – this tool
this tool, this tool, good, not good – something like this. And
from another hand, I suppose some features have the best
solution some certain tool. For example, to inform some set of
people it is very effective to use some kind of bot, for example.
So for this kind of communication, better to use this tool. For
another communication, better to use another tool. So to look
at the list of such requirements and appropriate tools it will be
very interesting, I suppose. Is it possible to look?

JAMES GANNON:

Thanks. Yes, so I think I should actually make a point as well. So
we don’t intend this to, for example, replace our mailing lists. We
will still do all of our official policy discussion, for example, on
the mailing list. This was intended to build upon a new way of
communicating. So I think that goes to your point is that there
has to be a matrix of how you handle your communications. It

Page 34 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

can’t merely be a single point, you are going to do absolutely
everything on one tool. Because there are different tools for
different solutions. I think building a matrix of different things
for different purposes would be a good idea.

MIKHAIL MEDRISH:

I understand you. It’s okay. It’s clear absolutely. I agree. What I
meant now it’s analysis. You talked about the analysis, the result
of analysis in the list. If it is possible to look at it will be great.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Seun?

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Yes, Thank you. Thank you, James, for this presentation. I
happen to be an NCUC member as well so I think I’m aware of
this development.
Because one of the issues that people have is having multiple
accounts so you said this integrates with other platforms – does
this allow if I have a Jabber account? I can actually with my
Jabber account connect to the channel or the group. Is it
possible? And I know you probably have not checked that. Just a
question now you could ask or later.

Page 35 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

The other thing is this looks to it may be good for it to become
the perhaps the “unofficial” communication platform for not
just the NCUC but for the entire ICANN. So if that happens, I’m
wondering… if that doesn’t happen anyhow and then perhaps
At-Large decides to go for this, is there an option to actually
from my own Rockets connect to yours? Is there kind of
connectivity if you want to join your channel without necessarily
creating another account on the NCUC? So that’s just a question.

JAMES GANNON:

Thanks. So on your first question, just looking at my backend on
the administration, I don’t see an option to log in with a Jabber
account. However, I know that I can do anything that can
support [OOF], Facebook, GitHub, GitHub Enterprise, GitLab,
Google, or LinkedIn accounts. So you can do federated sign-in
from all of those.
On connecting chats to chats, as in instances to instances, yes it
is there using WebRTC, but from what I’ve researched so far the
administration of that is quite complex. So yes it can be done,
but I think that would possibly not give you enough value back
for the increased administration burden.

Page 36 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks. Actually I do have lots of ideas and questions. But
maybe I won’t have time to ask all of them. But I think probably
one key thing is that, how were you able to install the
RocketChat? Did you get assistance from ICANN? Or is this
something you just did third party hosting and install it yourself?

JAMES GANNON:

Yes, thanks. So I have the unfortunate ability that I’m a former
recovering sys admin, so this is actually just hosted on my own
Amazon Web Services account. It’s using basically the Amazon
services. It’s using an Aurora backend with an instance there to
do the frontend. And so I did all the admin and install myself. I
didn’t go for staff support or anything.
That might be something – we thought it was the best idea to
develop it and do some pilot work ourselves, and then if we feel
that there’s enough value we may come back and put in a
budget request to say, “Hey, we want to go and do this officially
now.” This is purely just a pilot phase to see does our
community feel that this is a useful thing. Because we found that
we don’t really want to go off and ask for money for something
for a pilot when it’s only $12 Euro a month. Because we can
move quicker than that.

Page 37 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: I see another hand raised on that. But just to quickly bring in
something because we had seen these tools and there’s another
open source Slack clone called Mattermost. And I think the
challenge for us is that there is no easy way for us, perhaps we
don’t have enough sys admin experience, to really effectively do
it on our own. So one of the things [on] the other platforms that
we are looking at to addressing that Recommendation #31 is
something called eXo Platform, which is a kind of knowledge
management/social media network in one that will also
integrate wikis and so forth. So that’s another tool that we
wanted to look at.
I guess my question perhaps, Mark or Corinna, who hopefully
they’re still on the call, is that how can we really get these tools?
Because it sounds like what we really do need is our own testing
environment, our own hosting environment, where we just
install the tool – once we have that facility – we just install the
tool, test it, decide how we like it or not, report on it, and then
try another tool. I don’t know if Mark or Corinna could say a few
words to that effect. Corinna? Mark?
Okay. Well, this is something I want to follow up with staff on
this.

Page 38 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

CORINNA ACE:

EN

Yes, I would like to follow up on this one. I think it probably
deserves a little bit more time than the minute we have left, but
it is something that we’ve – like I mentioned to you and it’s an
ongoing conversation – we’ve discussed getting this framework
to a more standard process for being able to evaluate these
needs and get you to a point of just being able to test these
platforms. So I think it probably warrants some conversation,
and again, more follow up. But I would love to bring this up at
the next TTF call and also just discuss with you and whoever else
separately is to go forward.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Corinna. I see Rafik you had your hand raised?

RAFIK DAMMAK:

Thanks, Dev. It’s just really a small comment here. So it’s always
about balancing between how much time you will spend in
analyzing and to think about all cases [inaudible] and testing.
When I discussed with James a few weeks ago, the idea was let’s
experiment, let’s see how it works, what kind of issues, and see
how people react.
Also, as he explained in one of his slides, also how you be careful
to not have so many issue that let people don’t get hooked to
that service. So I think better you start, you experiment, you

Page 39 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

have that pilot, and also using some… like we thought that
Helsinki meeting is a good opportunity to do so. If it was
between meetings, I think there will be a low engagement. So
it’s better I think for you to plan, for example, aim for
Hyderabad, experiment, and you get things. That’s what I could
advise here.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Rafik. That’s a very good suggestion. And I think that
getting onboarding is actually quite hard for us. I see Satish, you
have a comment?

SATISH BABU:

I was one of the early users that signed up for ncuc.chat and I did
play around a little bit and I found it pretty easy to use and so
on. My worry more is with the edge conditions. APRALO or some
parts of ICANN could get pretty large in terms of the [inaudible]
number of users in certain conditions. By no means is it an
average kind of a thing, but these are things that happen once in
a while. How do we test for this edge conditions? Incremental
testing is very valuable for general user interface or user
friendliness, use UX basically. But the edge conditions are
important for us because we don’t want this thing to fail at that
point.

Page 40 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

JAMES GANNON:

EN

Just very briefly, I have a colleague that I’ve met through my
research of this who is running it internally in his company with
12,800 users.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Sorry, a follow up on that comment.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Well, there’s a queue here. Judith and then Seun.

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

I wasn’t sure – I liked what you were saying there – but one of
our issues that we had with Skype, which is why we were looking
at Slack, is the way of searching. So when people mention
something, it’s very difficult to find it again. And that’s one of the
things that we saw that Slack had is the ability to search through
the archives. But I assume after you get the public archives will
also be easily searchable.

JAMES GANNON:

Very briefly, if we decide to place this out as a production
instance and we start having a large archive and this becomes a
problem [then] search, it actually integrates with the last view
search and you can actually have a parallel last view search

Page 41 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

instance which will sit there and do real time indexing and will
do natural language searching for you so that you can say,
“What did I say on the 25th of November about Slack?” and it will
go off and find those messages. So search is a really cool feature
within it once you go to a production instance.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, James. Seun, you had a comment? Okay. Thanks for
that. Thanks, James, Rafik, I think this is actually quite very
interesting and I think it shows a little way forward and how
some open source solutions that we can deploy at little cost.
And again, I think perhaps we should structure a more… I take
your point, Rafik, about let’s have a [info] trial and target it
towards the next ICANN face-to-face meeting. So, again, very
illuminating and many thanks. And I think we value your
feedback and perhaps and we will welcome your participation in
future TTF calls.
Thank you. I think we’re coming up to the top of the hour. I think
there is one thing that I believe Judith, you wanted to say
something regarding the ICANN 56 Meeting App and the Web B
scheduling?

Page 42 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

EN

Yes. I used both the app and the scheduling. The app is good,
but my problems with the app were when you were outside the
Wi-Fi, you could not have any access to your schedule. And that
was a problem I thought with on the app. I also very much liked
on the schedule the webpage that it had that you could
subscribe to your own calendar feed. So you can create your
own calendar and you can subscribe to the events and then they
would update them as things happen. And I do also like that it
sends you a reminder each morning of what your day is like on
your schedule. What would be great if that schedule thing could
be connected to the app and they could talk to each other,
because you had to get your schedule, you had to log in. It’s the
same one you use on the app so it should feed in each other. So
hopefully that can be changed.

JOSHUA BAULCH:

I appreciate the feedback. Yes, it is something we are
addressing. We didn’t want to kill our current mobile app. We
will be resolving those issues. We were aware of them coming
into this and we knew with the smaller meeting because we
wanted to introduce the new schedule system on there first with
a smaller group. But yes, I appreciate it and we will resolve
those.

Page 43 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Okay, and I think, Jimmy, I think you have the last word.

JIMMY [SCHULZ]:

Another problem is that the app – it’s really nice, I love it – but
the schedule is wrong. There are dates in it that doesn’t exist. We
had that yesterday, Ariel and I was talking about that we had an
ALAC meeting at 3:15 scheduled that didn’t’ exist and there are
other things may be wrong which are not synchronized with
other schedules.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks, Jimmy. I fell for that as well. I was a little bit confused by
myself when I went to it.
So okay, I’d like to thank everyone actually, it was great to see so
many people coming in early in the morning. Olivier, I see you
have a hand raised. Go ahead.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yes. Thanks, Dev. And just a quick note on our wiki pages. I’ve
looked at those and I knew that we had a page at some point
which had all of the different products that we had tested. But
looking at our home page we’ve got only one thing that’s listed
there. It needs a bit of a clean-up. And certainly the comments at

Page 44 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

the bottom with dozens of people saying, “Please add me to this
list.” This can all be zapped out, please. Clean it up.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thanks. I guess that’s an action item for I guess Ariel and myself.
We can just go through and help clean up. I mean, I do also want
to like to restructure the wiki page a little bit better and come up
with ways.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: And certainly an easy to see link because we’re all about
userability. We’re all about that and if we can have at least a
front page on this and have that… I saw the table somewhere, I
can’t find it and I’ve been looking at it for the past 20 minutes. I
can’t find it, with all the different products that we’ve tried.

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: It is there. And I take your point, though. Glenn, you have a very
quick last word here.

GLENN MCKNIGHT:

As Dev says, we really appreciate new faces here. We have
monthly meetings, so Dev, if you can just let them know when
our meetings are and so invite them to the calls.

Page 45 of 46

HELSINKI – At-Large Technology Taskforce

EN

DEV ANAND TEELUCKSINGH: Thank you, and I think it’s time. I’d like to thank everyone and
[we have] more participants. And again, it was good to see a
good turnout for today’s session so early in the morning. Thank
you all. Good afternoon, good evening to everyone remote. And
this call is now adjourned. Have a great day.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 46 of 46

