HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 10:45 to 11:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

OLOF NORDLING:

Bang, bang, bang. That's the improvised clock.

CHAIRMAN SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Yeah. We know that this coffee break has been very short
but please, we will continue any moment, so please take your
seats. Thank you.

OLOF NORDLING:

Ladies and gentlemen, would you please take your seats. We'll
start this session in a couple of seconds.

CHAIRMAN SCHNEIDER:

So please take your seats. Dear colleagues, we will start very
soon. Right now, actually.
Okay. Thank you for taking your seats.
We have next on our agenda an issue that is not a new one. It's
something that we've been discussing for quite some time. And
Gema from Spain is one of the persons that has been
concentrating quite a lot of time and energy on this, so she will

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

be the lead for this issue, so let me give the floor to Gema to talk
about country codes and names as second-level domain names.
This is Session Number 3. These numbers of the sessions also
equal to the briefings that you have in your documentation, so
this is linked to documentation with the number 3. Thank you.
Gema, the floor is yours.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you, Chair, and good morning to everyone.
We have a brief presentation. The session we have now was
going to run for 45 minutes. Now it is less than 45, so we need to
make the best of our available time.
We are going to discuss two issues in this session. One is country
codes as second-level domains, and the second one is country
names as second-level domains.
If we can go to the next slide, please. Yeah.
The first thing that I want to do is to make you see the difference
between the issues in this session and the issue on country
name -- or country codes as top-level domains. That is a session
that we will have tomorrow.
We are going to start now to discuss two-letter codes as secondlevel domains. You can see the format on the right-hand side of

Page 2 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

the slide.

EN

It would be country code dot new gTLD, while

tomorrow we will see whatever domain name dot three-letter
code. But this is going to be tomorrow.
Next slide, please.
Okay.

So going into the substance of two-letter codes as

second-level domain names, the policy now in place comes from
the registry agreement for new gTLDs that establishes a
reservation of two-letter names as second-level domains. That
reservation can be lifted if the registry reaches an agreement
with the government or if it follows a procedure for their release
approved by ICANN.
The registry agreement establishes a condition for that release
by ICANN. That is, that measures to avoid confusion with the
country code are taken.
So ICANN decided to set up a procedure to release country codes
as second-level domains, and that procedure consisted of
requesting governments or anyone else to submit comments on
concerns that two-letter codes could cause as second-level
domains.
Then ICANN put up a Web form to submit comments.
Governments have 60 days from the publication of the request
to submit their comments.

Page 3 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

At one point in the moment -- at one point in time ICANN set that
only comments pertaining to confusion between two-letter
codes and country names were going to be considered. That
was in keeping with the Specification 5 of the registry agreement
that, as I said, conditioned approval of ICANN of this release to
the adoption of measures about confusion.
Then ICANN asked registries to propose mitigation plans to
avoid that confusion between second-level domains made of
two-letter codes with country codes.
Those mitigation plans have been submitted. The deadline
ended on April.
Now ICANN is studying those mitigation plans, as well as
comments made by governments.
We are right now in this moment -- that's why I wrote it in blue
because ICANN has not yet published the criteria that they will
use to assess the mitigation plans and concerns made by
governments.
So we have the opportunity now to weigh in in that thinking -that ICANN thinking of the criteria, and try to have an impact on
the criteria ICANN can use.
We can go to the next slide, please.

Page 4 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

Now we are going to see the different mitigation plans that the
registries have submitted because they are published.
Brand TLDs -- that is, the ones made of trademarks -- said that as
they have to follow very strict criteria for registration, basically
they have to use their TLD just to promote the image of the
company, there is no need to adopt any other mitigation
measure because the very use they will put the TLD to would
avoid confusion.
And there are other registries which are not brand TLDs but who
pledged to adopt restricted policies for registration that say that
because of their restrictive policy registrations, there is no need
to take additional mitigation measures.
This is the case, for instance, with geographic names because,
for instance, they say that they would only accept registrations
for individuals or companies having a linkage with the city or the
region or with some Category 1 TLDs because they say that they
could only accept registrations that have demonstrated
relationship with their string.
If you see the pie here, brand TLDs are 30% of the requesters,
and the ones with restricted registration policies are 4%.
The large chunk of the pie are open registries who promise to
investigate complaints about the confusion the use of the two-

Page 5 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

letter name can cause with the country code and then address
the concerns raised and take measures that can be, at the very
last resort, their suspension or cancellation of the domain name.
This is 55%.
Some TLDs, even open registries, have offered the possibility of
conducting phased allocation programs -- this is something
similar to sunrise period -- in which they could give priority to
ccTLDs to register the objected country code.
They say that this measure was used in the past with some
legacy TLDs and some pre-2012 new gTLDs like info, Bates,
travel, and so on. And I don't see the -- yeah. I see it's 7% in the
pie. 7% of the requesters offered this measure.
And then some registrars -- registries say that they could ban
third-party registrations, to avoid confusion between the ccTLD
and the two-letter code.
For instance, in my -- .ES, which is the country code for Spain,
and .ES.XYZ, which is one of the new gTLDs, if ES.XYZ accepted
third-party registrations, users could be misled into thinking
that that has something to do with the ES top-level domain.
This is not here in the pie, but we have to note that some
registries have proposed several measures. Phased allocation
combined with investigation of abuse reports. Prohibiting resale

Page 6 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

mixed with investigation. Maybe that's the reason why it is not
in the pie.
Then next slide, please.
Why should the GAC seize the opportunity to issue advice at this
stage?
Precisely because ICANN has not released the criteria they will
use to examine mitigation plans and governments' concerns
concerned.

So we have the opportunity to influence that

decision-making process.
I have distributed some days ago draft advice for this purpose.
And the goal of the language that I put is to provide the
distinctive character of two-letter codes as country identifiers in
the DNS and to prevent confusion, which is the ultimate
rationale of the registry agreement.
I'm going to do an assessment of the measures that have been
presented by registries for -- to feed the discussion.
The much popular -- or the measure that has been proposed by
both registries is to investigate abuse reports and address those
concerns. And I put a line: Do you like this? Maybe that's a
minimum. It's the minimum they should do. But I have some
doubts about what would happen if the registry is free to

Page 7 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

determine whether there is confusion or not. I mean, if there is
no standard criteria to determine what causes confusion or
what does not cause confusion, there is not going to be
consistent measures throughout the registries.
Maybe one standard criteria that was used in the past in .IRO
was to force registrant -- registrants to clearly state on their
websites that they don't have any relationship with the
constitutional authorities of a country if they don't have that
relationship.
Another thought for you to think on, category 12 -- category 1
TLDs. Do you think that these measures should by all means
taken by registries have category 1 TLDs? Category 1 are the
strings that relate to highly regulated sectors; that they have
entry requirements into the market, like the ones in financial
sector, health sector, et cetera.
The second measure concerns brand TLDs. I think this is a good
measure. I don't think there is risk of confusion with brand TLDs.
I'm going to put Google as an example, just as an example.
Imagine Google has a website for Spain which is called
GOOGLE.ES. What they plan to -- or what they could do, if ICANN
allows them to use .ES, would be to say .ES.GOOGLE. Everyone
would know that .ES.GOOGLE is for the Spanish website of

Page 8 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

Google. So I don't think it's going to cause confusion among
users.
The next measure is those registries with restrictive registration
policies, like the ones in the financial sector who have adopted
public interest commitments, if they have requirements like
verification of credentials, being an entity that is working in that
sector, and that is going to be checked prior to registration. And
the name is going to match the name of the company,
(indiscernible) a company called .ES or ES, the risk of confusion
goes down. So that would be a possible measure, too.
But not all registries with restrictive registration policies check
the requirements before registering. They do it afterwards. But
that can be effective, too, if they finally adopt measures to
eradicate that confusion, to cancel the name or suspend the
name.
I have added other criteria that have not been mentioned by
registries, and that is there are very sensible names, like .ARMY,
.NAVY, .AIRFORCE. They have very clear linkage with strictly
governmental functions, and maybe the visual impact of a
country code and those names triggers an association with the
country immediately. And we may want to avoid that visual
confusion.

Page 9 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

Other additional measure that I propose is that those registries
that have proposed to reserve two-letter names, to accept
registrations based on the plans for future use of those names or
who have pledged to check the relationship with the
government or something like that. These are very demanding
measures. They should be allowed to carry them out. Even if
ICANN adopts a standard measure, they are not as demanding
as these ones.
Next slide, please.
One of the measures that I have mentioned that the registries
have proposed is to conduct phased allocation periods. And I
like this measure. Obviously it would not be necessary for brand
TLDs, because I said that I think that the risk of confusion is
none.
Maybe TLDs with restricted registration policies shouldn't need
it either, because their registration policies already prevent that
confusion from happening, but I could add some qualifications
for those phased allocation periods.
The registries that have proposed to use phased allocation
periods say that the ccTLDs could be entitled to register names
in the first place, but what happens if a government doesn't
have good relationship with the ccTLD?

Or it has good

relationship with it, but the ccTLD is not interested in registering

Page 10 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

a hundred names. There are countries who have objected to 600
names. Maybe that is not business for ccTLD.
That's why I think that governments should be allowed to
participate in this phased allocation period.
Of course GAC members should help the registry to identify the
right authority within the country to register the name.
I think this is a good measure because countries could use this
name for purposes related to the country so there won't be any
confusion, and they may decide not to use that name once that
it's registry. That would put the name off the market, and that is
also effective to avoid confusion because you won't have that
name on the DNS.
If this measure is taken, of course governments and ccTLDs
shouldn't pay prohibitive prices for these names. They should
pay the ordinary price for these names during phased allocation
periods.
And what I propose is that after the period for governments and
ccTLDs, trademark owners have the opportunity to register the
names. Imagine there is a trademark named ES. If they register
the name, I guess that they will use the name to promote the
image of the company. So the use of the name could not cause

Page 11 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

confusion to Spanish users or whoever about the relationship
with the country.
But I have two questions for these phased allocation periods to
be good measures for the global domain (indiscernible). Maybe
after the presentation you can address them.
Someone told me that there are rules forcing registrants who
register names in phased allocation periods to effectively use
the name afterwards. That could mean that they could not
simply decide not to use the name.
If that's the case, that it's important for GAC members to know
and to make up their minds.
Another question is if registries charge renewal fees for these
kind of premium names -- premium because they have a very
high value in the market; you can see them on domain nameselling platforms -- if they charge renewal fees that are above
the ordinary price for any other domain name, because, okay, a
government can register a name for, say, $8 during phased
allocation periods, but if the year after he has to pay $20,000,
maybe you have to think twice. And we all need to know this
data before going forward.

Page 12 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

And the last measure that some raisers have proposed is to
prohibit third-party registration on the second-level domain for
the reason that I said before. So I like, also, this measure.
Next slide, please.
Now we go on briefly to the issue of country names as secondlevel domains. You see now the example. The situation here is
that the registry agreement reserves those names, so they
cannot be used unless the registry operator reaches an
agreement with relevant country, the relevant government, or
with ICANN.
ICANN should, in that case, set up a procedure subject to the
review by the GAC. This is what the specification 5 says.
Up to now, only 12 requests have been made by the registries.
Very few, then, but ICANN has not granted any of them yet. Why
not? Because it has not developed any process yet for the
release of country names.
But the GAC, back in the year 2015, thought that ICANN was
immediately going to set up that process, and we thought that
ICANN could follow the same procedure that it adopted for twoletter names; that is, notification of requests to governments,
governments have the opportunity to comment, and so on.

Page 13 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

So we decided -- we took the decision to create a database
where countries could say whether they would accept those
requests or not.
In the end, we ended up with a database in which countries
simply stated whether they wanted to be notified of requests or
not. It turned out that 80-something countries said that they
wanted to be notified, and only nine countries said they didn't
want to be notified.
So what we -- I propose now is to get ahead of ICANN in the
sense of trying to be proactive, trying to guide them, give them
some ideas as to how to develop that process. Why? Because
we were not completely satisfied with the process for the release
of two-letter names so there is an opportunity to improve the
way we have done things and because country names, I think,
are more sensitive than two-letter names. So we have to be
more careful in this case. Next slide, please.
So what we said before in the past about country names, it's just
underlining the importance on sensitivity countries attached to
those country names.

The need for actual consent.

For

instance, in the database it is stated that if a country has not
filled in the database ICANN cannot take for granted that the
country agrees to the release of the country name. So silence
doesn't mean approval. And we all -- we have said as well that

Page 14 of 27

EN

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

we ask ICANN to consider the process very thoughtfully and that
we involve ICANN at the early stage. So next slide, please.
In the draft advice that I've distributed I included some
elements. Basically that it could be good for this process to
conduct an analysis of past experiences. What were the rules in
the past for the use of country names, for instance on the .INFO,
.BIZ, and pre-2000 -- and other pre-2012 new gTLDs because
there were rules about the use of country names. It would be
good to go through that experience to know how many of those
country names were registered. Of those country names that
were registered, what is the use of country names? What are the
cases of misuse of country names, whether they're having
conflicts with them? And it would be good also to ask at least
(indiscernible) Registries and registrars holding category one
TLDs, what's their plans for the release of country names are,
what measures they plan to take, whether they think of phased
allocation periods or auctions or whatever.

And there are

maybe some other elements that I did not include in the draft
advice but I included them now. And it could be good for ICANN
to know what are the particular concerns GAC members have
about country names? Why are they so important for them?
Because

of

political

reasons?

Any

related

reasons?

Jurisdictional reasons? Or other? It will also be important to
note again that most countries have capacity limitations to deal

Page 15 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

with complex processes like the one implemented for two-letter
names that maybe countries could need to conduct entire
consultations among the different ministries and that can take
time. Although the GAC has already more than 160 countries
there are yet countries that are not GAC members and how to
protect their country names. It's an important consideration.
And we can also ask ourselves and ICANN what the review by the
GAC means. That it's a condition that ICANN has to respect to
release country names. And it could be good also to think if
there should be different measures depending on the kind of
TLD, brand TLDs. Do they need to have restrictive policies as
regards to the use of country names? Category one names -- or
you know that the countries are reserved in six different
languages. Is it equally relevant to reserve all names in all these
languages under whichever TLD? And this is the kind of things
that I put forward to you to think about it. Next slide, please.
It's more or less this is what I've told you already. Next slide. It's
finish. Do you want to issue advice on this? What do you think
about the GAC advice? Do you think that different TLDs merit
different measures? And I think I've used up all the time. I'm
sorry.

We have very little time left.

Maybe we can start

discussion. You can also use the email list to express your views,
and throughout the week we will try to get to something. Thank
you. I'm sorry about running out of time.

Page 16 of 27

EN

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

[ Applause ]
Yes, very briefly, if ICANN GDD can answer the questions I bet.
Thank you.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thank you, Gema. And thank you for having me here. My name
is Krista Papac, and I'm with ICANN staff. I'm a member of the
global domain divisions team. So I think your first question,
Gema, was about whether a registry -- whether they're required
to use the domain names if they're registered. So if a twocharacter label becomes registered, is there a requirement that
the registrant uses -- actually uses the domain name, is that -that was the first question, correct?

So there are no

requirements under the contract for them to use or not use
them. Registry operators have registration policies. They're
required to publish them in a place that is easy to find and that
anyone can go look at them and review them.

And their

registration policies are at the -- they are the choice of the
registry operator, as long as they don't conflict with any other
terms of their contract. So the ICANN contract doesn't require
them -- does not require registered names to be used or not
used but a registry could have its own registration policy that
they set that would be published and that you could see what
their requirements are.

Page 17 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

Second question.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yes. So I think your question is, basically can they -- can a
registry or a registrar charge a higher price for one of these two
character labels. So pricing is set by the registries and then the
registrar follows after that with their own pricing. ICANN -- we
don't regulate pricing or oversee pricing whatsoever so it's not -it's not within the contract what the price can or cannot be. The
contract does offer -- or does have -- the Registry Agreement has
a requirement that if pricing is going to be changed at any time
there's a -- or renewal pricing will be affected, that there's a
notice period to registrars about the changes in the pricing
that's coming up. But there's -- other than that, there's not any
specific requirement around what a price can or can't be at any
given time.
And then I just want to -- something to point out is, registrations
can be for anywhere from one to ten years.

So if you're

purchasing one of these domain names you could register it for
one year or any number of years up to ten.

Page 18 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

SPAIN:

EN

I don't know if we have time to discuss, otherwise I encourage
people to express their views on the mailing list.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we can run a few minutes over, so you can ask for some
questions or comments.

SPAIN:

I don't know who was first.

I see Iran, Denmark, and the

Netherlands. Maybe Iran, Denmark, and then Netherlands.

IRAN:

Anyone that you wish, if you have the time to express. It's up to
you. Can I proceed?

SPAIN:

Sorry, Kavouss. I wasn't paying attention. Can you repeat?

IRAN:

Okay. Let's make it short. First of all, thank you very much for
your very, very comprehensive presentation which requires a lot
of work that you have done. We are very grateful to you. It is
highly appreciated.
You raise one question that's very important inside your
presentation. Do we have an advice to make. In our view, we

Page 19 of 27

EN

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

should consider a general advice to ICANN. Don't go ahead until
we totally finish this study. It is very, very sensitive issues. I'll
give you one example. There was a thread of TLD which GAC
does not agree to be delegated. I don't want to say what was
that. But it was given. And suppose that that uses the second
level name of the country? Was the TLD of the country. So what
was the situation? So we have not studied it yet. There are
many questions.

Sale is something.

Resale is something.

Sensitive is something. There are so many questions not yet
answered. And you have raised many of them. So I think
perhaps we consider the appropriateness to give a general
advice that please don't delegate or don't proceed with a
request until we finish the study. Thank you.

SPAIN:

Denmark.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Netherlands.

SPAIN:

Finn and then you, Thomas.

Page 20 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

DENMARK:

EN

Thank you, and thank you for your presentation which was very
good and down in the details. From our point of view we have
.DK and we have allowed for all those years country and twoletter codes to be registered before .DK, and to my knowledge,
we have had no problem, no user confusion, any problems. So
that's also why we have no problem with making DK or Denmark
on the second level.
So my observation is that I have -- we have difficulties to see the
problem. We know that certain countries can foresee there
might be a problem but our experience is that there haven't
been any problems. Looking at the advice, I must admit that it is
very, very detailed. And even though I think I was listening
carefully, I don't know whether I fully understand the detailed
steps here trying to regulate prices, trying to do face things. If
we're going in those kind of details, we ought to consult with
others, other stakeholders before and have their view so we can
have a good ground to discuss this.
So we will be reluctant to have those kind of advice. And if there
is going to be an advice it will also be important that this is
advice from some countries or many countries but not all the
GAC. Thank you.

SPAIN:

Page 21 of 27

Thank you, Finn.

EN

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

[ Applause ]
Next, Thomas de Haan from Netherlands.

NETHERLANDS:

Thank you, Gema. I think it's very comprehensive. I think you
really narrowed down the problem and gave some options to
solve. The only thing is that we -- we have a couple of concerns
with your proposal. Basically three, I think. First, we also
requested the confusability issue.

We have not seen any

problems. As Denmark said, we have already a legacy with NL
being used in many, many TLDs. We have not noticed any
problem. And then, of course, we have to reckon that a ccTLD is
in the first level very representative. On a second level, it may
not have a significance in other strings like car or wash or
whatever. It has a significance as a top-level domain. We have
in Netherlands a lot of examples in which second level domains,
short ones, have perfectly lived together. We have, for example,
DE.NL which is a coffee company, Douwe Egberts.

It's the

country code of Germany under the country code of
Netherlands. So I mean, this is -- this could potentially be, in
your theory, very confusing, but it's not really.
Second, we have to, let's say, give the good significance to what
is confusability, not as -- let's say a general line, avoid any

Page 22 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

country code on the second level.

EN
I think this is not

proportionate.
The second point is that we -- in the proposal, you propose to
have a kind of phasing: First, government ccTLDs and then
trademark owners. Again, as I said in force, we have trademarks
with two digits, DE. But, I mean, we have BT, Volkswagen, VA;
Hewlett-Packard, HP.

So I question what -- why should

governments and ccTLDs have priority over trademark owners.
That's the second concern.
The third concern is that we are -- with this methodology, we are
introducing a new concept, is that governments and ccTLDs
have to be there in a certain time frame to register name. It
means that they should be -- it gives administrative burden also
for governments who don't want to have this, let's say, burden.
And it means that you have to react as a government on a
certain time frame, very short. I don't know if all governments
are aware of it. But it would be a tremendous -- it could be a
tremendous administrative burden.
Secondly, there are no -- we are not all countries in the world. I
mean, if the GAC representatives are being notified, others will
not. So they will miss the opportunity, basically. I don't think
this would be fair.

Page 23 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

I think I'll stop with this. But as Denmark said, there are a lot of
things if you go in detail in advice, you bring in a lot of
complexity which we cannot overview on this moment. Thank
you.

SPAIN:

Thank you, Thomas. Next I have India.

INDIA:

So thank you for a very informative presentation. Very briefly,
while we appreciate that the mitigation strategy could be a way
forward, but what happens if -- while doing the mitigation, it is
possible that we could find a solution. But what happens if no
solution is found? How does one proceed forward if conflicting
viewpoints are not, you know, amicably resolved? So we do feel
that the governments should have the final word on this.
And to illustrate, I would just mention that for India, we have -the top-level domain is .IN. And we have domain .ln, which is
small letter L which is deceptively similar to .IN. So we have
been raising this issue, and we have not been able to get a
satisfactory resolution to this. So we feel that the governments
should have the last word on this.

Page 24 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

SPAIN:

EN

I can only take two more interventions. So you have to decide
which of you. Australia, United Kingdom, and I think no more.
Thank you.

AUSTRALIA:

Thank you. I think it's important to remember that there are
other uses for the letters that make up our country codes. You
know, they could be acronyms or trademarks. I think the GAC
should perhaps focus its attention on principles of co-existence,
how we can -- instead of a blanket ban on them or governments
getting first rights, how we can, you know, work together to use
them. Thanks.

SPAIN:

Thank you for the brevity.
United Kingdom.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you, Gema. I will be very brief as well.
I have a lot of sympathy with the concerns expressed by
Denmark and the Netherlands in particular. This is a very major
step forward for the GAC, for individual governments to
undertake if such a regime of preference and so on were to be
instituted.

Page 25 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

I'm also mindful of some doubt about the starting premise here.
I think Denmark hit the note in this regard in terms of
experience. But just following on, my experience is that I'm not
aware of any representations being made to the U.K.
government in this regard about confusability and so on.
And perhaps the approach that Australia has taken is one that is
resource efficient and having a look at what problems have
arisen for certain administrations and see whether there are any
deficiencies in resolving those problems within the existing
framework of remedies and resolution process. Maybe that's
the approach to take forward.
Thank you very much for your work, though, in this regard. It's -and I appreciated very much your presentation. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Gema, and all who contributed. Those
who have not had the chance to express yourself, you can also
use, of course, our emails, mailing list. And we have a session
that is related, as Gema has outlined. There is another session
that is dealing with a similar issue, so there may be a chance. It
is also just 30 minutes, but there may a chance for you to step in
there. Thank you very much.

Page 26 of 27

HELSINKI – Country Codes and Names as Second Level Domains (SLDs)

EN

And we have some draft proposed advice text that we will
somehow have to agree on until Thursday. So also feel free to
discuss this electronically, the concrete text, in the meantime.
That may help us to be as efficient as we can to cope with this
issue by Thursday.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 27 of 27

