HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 10:45 to 12:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Please take your seats. We have to restart. Time is running.
All right. In this session, we will go back or go ahead to another
discussion on IANA transition. I don't think we should spend -We have a limited time, of course. I don't think we should spend
more time in the plenary here discussing the Customer Standing
Committee. I took it as there was no objection to us having a
liaison. So we'll continue with this electronically. The deadline
is, if I'm having it right in my head, the 22nd. So think about who
that liaison could be.

Let's continue that discussion

electronically from today and during the meeting, and then in
the next week.
I suggest that we spend this 30 minutes or what is remaining of
them on the accountability track because there's a lot of
fundamental things that we need to get to grips with, including
also like what we've heard the GNSO has started to do, analyzing
structures and modifying structures, if necessary; creating new
structures.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

I quickly hand over the floor to Tom who has prepared an
excellent brief on the follow-up of the accountability Work
Stream 1. And, Tom, please, go ahead.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Thomas.
Good morning, everybody.
The starting point for the discussions here that we included in
the brief that we circulated in the main briefing pack a couple of
weeks ago, the starting point for this discussion is suggested to
be what the GAC decided in Marrakech.
You may remember there was great excitement concerning the
GAC's role in finalizing the reports of -- the final report of the
CCWG Accountability. And in the GAC's Marrakech communique,
and I'm quoting here, the GAC stated that as regards
recommendations

one

and

two,

and

those

are

the

recommendations in the Work Stream 1 report that set up the
empowered

community

structure,

as

regards

those

recommendations, the GAC expresses its willingness to take part
in the envisioned empowered community mechanism as a
decisional participant, under conditions to be determined
internally.

Page 2 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Well, those conditions have not yet been determined internally
by the GAC, so my understanding is this is the starting point for
that consideration. There has been no major discussion of this
issue within the GAC since the Marrakech meeting.
We have suggested in the briefing, based on a mapping process
against the current operating principles that we attached as
well, we've suggested that discussions on the policy issues could
include a basic principle of the GAC treating all actions within
the empowered community on their merits; secondly, clarifying
to which there is an option of abstaining from some practices
and what this means in practice; and thirdly, developing criteria
for participation that address both decision-making situations
and ones where an advisory role may be appropriate.
On the more detailed issues where the GAC, like the other SOs
and ACs across ICANN -- and as you just heard, the GNSO is
starting to deal with these issues, as well, for their purposes -but for the purposes of the GAC, we have outlined a number of
areas for consideration and eventual decision by the GAC.
Firstly,

with

regard

to

the

empowered

community

administration, which is the body created by the bylaws to be
the collective entity of all decisional participants.

And

remember, the GAC is now a decisional participant because it
said so.

Page 3 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

The procedures for dealing with challenges to Board actions will
require GAC to consider, amongst other things, who the GAC
believes its constituents are for receiving requests to challenge
Board actions. If a member of the community comes to the GAC,
is this the right place for them to come to ask the GAC to initiate
a challenge to a Board decision? What sort of people will the
GAC listen to to initiate those sorts of issues from the
community? That's one example.
The GAC may accept petitions only from governments and
public authorities, for example. This is covered or mentioned in
the brief.
And there is also some need for a procedure for the GAC to
decide specific cases within the time frames that are in the
bylaws. In most cases, those time frames will require a decision
of all decisional participants between sessions; that is, not at -not waiting for the next ICANN face-to-face meeting.
So those are all of the practical issues that we've tried to
summarize in the briefing document.
There is also a relationship with the operating principles, of
course, but we are suggesting to you in our advisory role that the
proper sequence is to settle the policy approach first; that is,
what the GAC wants to do about its rules, and structuring those
rules. And then as a final element transfer them into amended

Page 4 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

operating principles. We are suggesting that perhaps the better
approach is the operating principles are the means to the end,
but the GAC must first consider the end; that is, what sort of
procedures you want now that the GAC is a -- well, say is a
decisional participant; will be a decisional participant when the
bylaws come into effect at the end of September this year, if all
assumptions continue to be met.
So that's the overview to start the discussion, Thomas. I'll hand
back to you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes. Thank you for this introduction. And there are a number of
-- as we all know, a number of elements of key importance that
we need to start working on now.
So let me give the floor to you for comments, questions, views.
This is the moment to start getting engaged.
Brazil.

BRAZIL:

Thank you, Thomas. And good morning to you all.
I would like to refer to the participation of the GAC members in
the CCWG Accountability. And first of all, I would like to publicly

Page 5 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

thank our colleague from Niue for withdrawing his candidacy as
the GAC appointed member to the CCWG Accountability.
Brazil considers the role of GAC appointed members in the CCWG
Accountability to be key to the success of the work stream
exercise. As we previously expressed, we believe GAC members
should exercise a high level of engagement in this process.
Former, and new members as well, as more GAC colleagues,
should have the same opportunities to be able to engage in this
exercise. And they should, as well, have a deep knowledge of
the Work Stream 1 Accountability process.

Once the Work

Stream 2, should not change but, rather, build on the outcomes
of the Work Stream 1.
And last but not least, let me reiterate that Brazil will be in a
position, if this is the understanding of the whole GAC, to fill one
of the five positions of GAC appointed members to the CCWG
Accountability.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much.
And thank you also for Par from Niue to be very flexible and help
us in the sense that we have now five candidates for the five

Page 6 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

membership seats in the CCWG. They come from Canada, Iran,
Brazil, Denmark, and Argentina.
So maybe we can have a quick feedback from you in the sense
that is this something that you can accept as representation
with regard to membership of the GAC in the CCWG for Work
Stream 2? Knowing that the status of participant is open to any
of us, and a lot and actually an increasing number of GAC
members have made use of this during Work Stream 1, and we
hope that won't change for Work Stream 2. So -- But since the
CCWG is waiting to hear the final names of the members from
our side, can we do this now and see whether these five
candidates are acceptable to you?
Panama, please.

PARAGUAY:

Thank you, Thomas. Nicolas from Paraguay speaking. Do you
want us to give you our answers now or you need them in
writing? What would be the procedure?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The transcript will make sure that what you say now is available
afterwards in writing. So let's do it orally. I think that's the
easier way, if we can get this quickly done.

Page 7 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Peru.

PERU:

I would like -- Peru would like to support the nomination of the
five persons you just mentioned, the five countries you just
mentioned, especially Argentina, Brazil.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Let me maybe do it the other way around. Is there
somebody who has concerns or problems with the five
candidates as a whole?
I don't see a hand up. So can I take this as agreed? Okay. Thank
you very much.
And of course we made it very clear that they will be available to
all of us. They will do hard work not just in participating but also
in reporting from the meetings and coordinating among
themselves who is going to do what. And we are very confident
that this will work.
Thank you very much.
With this, let's go back to the question of how to -- how to assess
and make sure that our internal procedures and structures
enable us to do what we want to do or are supposed to do in this
new structure. And there are two elements to this of course.

Page 8 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

One is -- and Tom has already referred to this. One is we may
have to come to a shared vision in a little more detailed way
about how we would actually want to participate in this
empowered community, because if I'm not mistaken, if my
memory does not fool me, then there were still some, let's say -we were not all on the same page in every detail of how our
participation is supposed to be shaped. And where we met was
we need to develop criteria or indicators or a mechanism for us
to do that.
So -- And then once we have a more or less shared vision, we
need to actually create the mechanism or look at the existing
structures. And if we think we need to build new mechanisms,
we need to build them.
So I think these are two elements. And then the question is in
what shell do we do this? Do we put this into the Operating
Principles Working Group or should we, rather, keep it in a
separate process, more related to the actual accountability
team?
So I think we should use this time here now to try and identify
the next steps and the direction that we want to go.
I see Iran and Denmark.

Page 9 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

IRAN:

EN

Thank you, Thomas.
I think we should not hurry to decide on something which is
composed of two almost contradictory status that we have.
There are five constituencies or SO/ACs. Three of them are
supporting organizations and two of them, they are advisory
committee.
We have mentioned in our previous communique that we would
like to remain advisory. Therefore, any decision we make in
future should not contradict that very principle based on which
people have consensus.
However, it was also mentioned in our communique that we are
happy that, like other SO and AC, we have been empowered to
exercise our rights. How exercise that? And when exercise that?
That is a matter that we will need to discuss and see whether we
take it on a case-by-case basis, whether we treat it differently.
Therefore, I think among the five, there is one which is almost
close to us, but not exactly, and that is ALAC. It is close to us.
They are also advisory. Although they have director, we don't
have any director as such appointed with vote.

We have

director, but it does not have the right of vote.
So, therefore, we perhaps start some discussion and reflection,
and not to decide because it is very early. However, we should

Page 10 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

maintain these compositions of contradictions.

Remain

advisory and exercise the right of decision-making.
You have to find a way between these on one hand, retain our
advisory capacity that many people they agree. On the other
hand, if there are cases, issues that we need to react, in
particular those areas that touches the right of the GAC,
government, let us say, we should consider that how we react
and so on and so forth. We may not be involved in all decisionmaking. We are not like X and Y in the ICANN community, but we
have a little bit different. So this is an issue that we have to, first
of all, discuss but wait but not decide and also maybe the
decisions or approach taken by ALAC may be also helping us to
facilitate our decision-making for this matter. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran. United Kingdom. Oh, sorry, Denmark. You're
so close to each other. Like here. Not geographically, of course.

DENMARK:

Thank you, Chairman. Yes, things have for many years been in
England and have actually still there's power of England who
still have Danish names and so on, as far as I remember. But
that's another history.

Page 11 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Thank you, and thank you also for Tom to touch upon it is
important to look at the angle, what do we want to achieve and
in what capacity do we want to participate in the future? And as
you, Chairman, rightly said, there might be or probably is
different views on that and we have that discussion before we
have decided that we should participate as a decision-making
party but to what extent, that is still to be discussed. And I think
-- and I'm -- I think that was also the message for Kavouss, as I
understood, that might be a discussion which we need a couple
of meetings to really engage in to find out what our role should
be.
On the other hand, if the transition go through, and we all hope
that, then the new process will actually be effective at the end of
September. And we have been discussing a lot, and I think the
whole GAC, if I remember right, think that we should be advising
as much as possible. And we could already on the 1st of October
be able to give advice. There might be a petition in -- during the
autumn for one of the AC or SOs. So we ought to put into our
procedures to try to work on the procedures. I think we can
work on the procedures, how we will engage in the different
stage. We do not need to discuss or decide yet what we do in -in the last instant and level eight I think it was called at one time,
because that is where we might go into a decisional part. And to
what extent we're going to do that, whether it will be case-by-

Page 12 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

case or we will say that in certain circumstances we will do that,
I think that needs a lot of discussion.
So our view will be, let's work on the practical things. How do
we step in and participate in the first steps of the -- the role that
we will have. Whether it should be in -- in one group or another,
we are flexible to that thing. The only thing we think would be
important that we start the work in -- right away. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Finn. And actually, I was thinking along the same
lines, that that may be the -- the easiest or the most pragmatic is
since we will not be asked to vote or not vote in the next few
weeks, that we should build on developing the mechanisms first
for where we agree on a more detailed level than where the -the discussion or in other words, we shouldn't wait until
everything is sorted out and start actually building these
mechanisms.

I think that's -- that's definitely a good way

forward. But we also have to get that part clear in the end. So -but I think Rome wasn't built in a day so start with the
fundament and then build the roof at the end. That makes
sense. Other comments or questions or views? Switzerland.

Page 13 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

SWITZERLAND:

EN

Hello. Good morning to everyone. Thank you for giving me the
floor. I just wanted to throw in also another element which we
may consider when developing the -- the conditions or the
modalities how to participate. And this is that we -- perhaps this
is a very pragmatic approach or so and not very imaginative, but
I hope that practical because the idea to be based -- or to base
on our experience as a chartering organization because it's one
of the most similar things we have been doing. And I think we -we got better at it as we proceeded in the -- as we advanced in
the process.

But in the end, if you look at the decisional

participants in the empowered community and the chartering
organizations in the CCWG accountability, they are almost the
same. And the ways to participate will be to sit next and similar.
And it's also very different to our other function, to the advisory
function. It's a completely different field of action. But we have
had already a two-year experience. So let's draw on that. And
we have also, based on that experience, the guidelines for
participation in CCWGs which, of course, it's not a one-to-one
trans -- possible to be translated to this environment, but we can
draw on that.

And perhaps the one aspect which will be

different and which might require some adjustments is the -- the
timings because this -- sometimes the talk that the GAC is -- is
very slow in reacting, but as a matter of fact, we were able to
make a lot of inputs into the CCWG processes during 2015 and
this year. So we have learned a lot how to do that quite swiftly.
Page 14 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

So we should be confident that we -- we can do that also during
the -- within the time frames set by the engagement escalation
and so on procedures of the empowered community. But -- and
this is true, perhaps we have to look into very clear time frames
with silence procedures, procedures we use in -- in other
organizations, perhaps with more efficient and lightweight
decision-making processes for some of the steps to be really
capable of taking actions. So that's from my part for the time
being. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And I think you raise a number of excellent points
that for a -- we actually have been a decisional participant in the
CCWG. We may not have realized it, but that's what we've been
doing in the past two years, in the CWG and the CCWG. And I
think a very important point that you're raising is the timing
issue.

Because we've been able to deliver positions and

coordinate positions in the GAC in times that I don't think we've
been able to do that before. And we will have to do the same
because if you look at the deadlines of the escalation or the time
frames in the escalation steps, they are fairly short, like onemonth deadlines and other things. So we really have to -- have
to have a structure that allows us, like give each other early
warning that something may come up and then we have to be
very quick. And the issue of the silent procedure I think is

Page 15 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

something that we will not be able to do without. So we'll need
to have something like a silent procedure.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I see Brazil, Canada, U.K., Argentina. Thank you.

BRAZIL:

Thank you, Chair. Very quickly, I would like to second the
distinguished delegate of Switzerland.

We also agree that

previous experience as a chartering organization, I think the GAC
has shown that it can be an effective participant, decisional
participant. So we have shown that we can make decisions, and
I think we can engage in this community mechanism.
I also agree with the delegate from Iran and Denmark that we
should not perhaps not rush in -- in making decisions with
regards to our operating principles but I think we need to at
some point make these decisions and have this let's say
principles defined. So I would be in favor of defining a clear
timeline -- deadline for us to have those principles defined. And
with respect to participation in all those previous steps,
engagement with the community and also in our advisory role in

Page 16 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

those steps but also with regards to our participation in the
voting step, in the last step of the community empowerment
mechanism, I think we should work with a clear deadline with
this respect. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Brazil. Canada.

CANADA:

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I'll be very brief. We
agree with the points raised by Denmark and we would also
propose that once the criteria around GAC engagement in the
empowered community has been finalized, that it be posted
publicly to promote transparency around GAC engagement and
the empowered community, which we believe would also be
consistent with the ATRT recommendations. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think that's a good point, and I'm sure that will be
appreciated by the others, that they know how the GAC is
intending to actually live its role as a participant in this
empowered community. Next on my list is United Kingdom,
Mark.

Page 17 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

UNITED KINGDOM:

EN

Yes, thank you, Chair. I agree very much with the previous
speakers. And what I'm in particular mindful of in terms of the
community being made fully aware of what -- what the GAC is
deciding in its modalities for participation is that when the
escalation path does get to key decisional phases there will be
votes with thresholds and that the thresholds will need -- you
know, that there will need to be predictability as to whether the
GAC is actually going to be one of the participating SOs and ACs
to determine the application of the threshold for a decision. So
very much agree with the point in particular made by Brazil. We
need to work this through very carefully with a clear deadline to
take decisions on how. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, U.K. Argentina.

ARGENTINA:

Thank you, Chair. I would like to support what our colleagues
from Switzerland and Brazil have expressed. I think the GAC has
gone through a process of participation that we have learned
from there and we have done well. So we should have that in
mind. And also, we should have in mind the multistakeholder
process and a scheme that we all support. I think that we are in
favor and we agree with that.

Page 18 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

In that scenario, all stakeholders have a major role, all of them.
So the role of the governments should also be relevant in all the
processes. So I will stop here. We should have that in mind.
That's my message. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Further comments?
United States.

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Chairman. And thank you to all the colleagues who
have weighed in previously on this very important issue. The
United States just believes that the GAC should not -- we do not
support the GAC exercising in any of the community power in a
decision-making role. We are able to consider the idea of the
GAC participating in the community powers as a non-voting
liaison, and we appreciate the ideas moving forward and we
look forward in participating in this conversation as it
progresses. But our position as far as exercising the community
powers remains that we prefer the GAC remain in an advisory
role. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 19 of 42

Thank you, United States.

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Other comments? Questions? United Kingdom.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you, Chair. Sorry to come back in again on this point.
There was another point I wanted to mention. That is, that
these time windows in the escalation path may occur when we
are not able physically to meet. So bear that in mind as well in
terms of our agility and ability to react and provide a response.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes. Thank you. You're absolutely right. And we had that before
in the CCWG where we had public comment periods during -intersessionally and we had to have telephone conferences. And
we managed most of the time, Olga -- (laughter) -- when
something is more controversial, it is more difficult so we need
to keep that in mind. It's good that you raise it.
If you can lock people in a room physically, you can make them
agree and not let them out before they agree. That doesn't work
on a teleconference.
So there are limits to this.
[ Laughter ]
So this is not irrelevant. Thank you, Mark.

Page 20 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Yes, the gentleman in the back, please.

SWAZILAND:

Thank you, Chair. I'm Andreas Dlamini from Swaziland, GAC rep.
Chair, I support the GAC retaining power for the right to vote and
take decisions in the community but probably something that
we can (indiscernible) every day but have that right when things
call for that, when situations call for that.
Now, it puzzles me a bit when -- I'm sorry that now I will be sort
of mentioning but, you know, the position of the U.S. as we are
in this period of transition, they've got some -- the U.S.
government has got some decisions to make in the transition.
And when they hold a position, as far as the GAC participation is
concerned, I think it calls for them to sort of explain a bit more
on this position that they are taking as to -- because we know
still that decision is coming from their side.
Yeah, I think it would call for them to explain a bit more on why
they taking this position as far as the participation of GAC is
concerned. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Swaziland. In fact, there is some diversity of views
on -- we have some who would rather not go to the very end of

Page 21 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

voting. Others don't see a problem in this. And the consensus
middle ground was that we, for the time being, would not -would keep all the options open and then discuss if and when
and how we're going to use them.
So to sum up -- I don't know, U.S., if you want to react to the
question by Swaziland. Thank you.

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Chairman. Simply put, I believe this is a point that
my predecessor has made before me and that the U.S. has been
pretty clear on for some time now, is that if the GAC were to
exercise any of the community powers, this would convert the
GAC from an expert body providing public policy advice to the
board into an operational role for which the GAC is not
organized, in which the GAC is not likely to be effective.
I'm more than happy to continue this conversation offline with
colleagues. But I don't believe this is a radical position or a
surprise or deviates with positions we've taken for some time
now. So thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 22 of 42

Thank you, United States. Japan?

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

JAPAN:

EN

Thank you. With regard to the GAC participation to empower
community, we believe that GAC should basically continue to
play advisory role (indiscernible).

That's why GAC should

exercise its voting power as a last resort on the basis of
consensus and case by case. And (indiscernible) itself should
otherwise take into account maintaining this operation with the
future of ICANN decision-making. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much. And, in fact, this idea of taking things on a
case-by-case basis is something that is recurring, and that may
be part of a solution in the end.
Iran?

IRAN:

Thank you, Thomas.
Two issues which are connected together.

Imagine that

fundamental bylaw is put for approval. Part of fundamental
bylaw directly relates to activities of GAC. If they want to change
that where they see that is a danger for us, going to the concept
of advisory capacity, we should remain silent and allow that that
fundamental bylaw be changed and touches our positions?

Page 23 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Imagine also if the mission of the ICANN board or ICANN is
changed in a way that touches part of the things that is public
policy issue. Still, we should remain silent and not say anything
because you're advisory?
Or this case-by-case is one of the important mechanisms that we
have to see which cases really we need to react and which cases
for us not to say anything because in the new bylaw, silence
means neither pro nor against.

So this is an issue, very

important.
Another issue in connection of that is when we have consensus.
In the description of the bylaw, it is mentioned that it is up to
GAC to prevent that the whole GAC be captured by one single
government saying that I oppose, therefore, there is no
consensus. So we have to find a way how to do that.
This is not up to the other community. This is up to the GAC to
decide. So that is a very important element. We have to see how
to do that, whether that country that would not support the
others who remain silent saying "I don't oppose that you
proceed with that," but they don't participate.
So there are many important elements in this consensus
building in the GAC because that is one of the major issue for us
in the entire bylaw and in particular, when we go to the GAC
advice to have GAC advice as consensus. If one country block

Page 24 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

that, never we have any advice at all because that country
blocked that. So we should avoid that. How to avoid that, we
have to work it out.
The third element, Chairman, is reaction within the limited time,
one month and so on and so forth. I see very difficult for GAC
unless we have new mechanisms how to react within that
limited time. If you wait for the next meeting, it's too late. Next
meeting after that, petition comes. So we have to find a way
when the question is raised and when we decide to participate
in the decision-making, how quickly we could do that because
there's no physical meeting.
My experience -- I may be wrong. Without criticizing anybody, it
is very, very difficult for GAC to decide on virtual meeting, very
difficult. One, very little participation. Two, no reactions to the
question raised by the Chair or the people running that virtual
meeting. And then postponing that.
When you postpone that, that means that the end, GAC will be
considered as no views on that, so neither pros nor against the
issue. So there are many important elements that we have to
think between now and first October or whatever, if the
transition take place. If it does not, I don't know.
But even if transition does not take place, the ICANN board has
made it clear the overwhelming majority of those provisions in

Page 25 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

the accountability will be implemented because that is a good
work of 15 months. I don't know exactly what it is.
I think we have a lot of work to do between now and the next
meeting, how to do it to have all these things.

But most

important for us is to avoid GAC be captured by one
government. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Kavouss. And as you say, what will take place
anyway is the accountability reform. That is not dependent on
any decision in the U.S. or national level. That is an ICANN
internal decision that will take place. So we need to prepare
anyway.
You raise a good point with regard to the consensus
mechanisms that we have which is something that we have to
start working on as part of the operating principles working
group because we have some in how we work in our operating
principles. And I think we should maybe use the time that we
have to define how we would work on these issues. And we will
probably never get to more than a compromise between those
who prefer to be rather active or -- and those who prefer to be
rather closer to the role that we used to have, vis-a-vis the
board.

Page 26 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

We also have to see that this is a different process that is new.
The empowered structure is not something that is comparable
to -- what we've been doing now is advising the board on issues.
This is a new process where everybody has a new role. Also, the
others have new roles in this process. But we may -- following
Denmark's idea, we may build on criteria for participation and
approach us to a GAC-internal decision-making process on
issues, also built on what Switzerland and others have said,
building on how we've worked in our decision-making, on our
input into the CWG and CCWG. And there have been some good
practice examples in this work, also in short time lines, also in
intersessionally.
The more controversial something is, the more difficult it is. But
not everything is so controversial that intersessional procedures
may not work. So I think we can build on some experience.
I don't know. Maybe, Tom, you have some ideas to propose that
you could get the ball rolling with regard to -- I like his face when
I call him like this -- with regard to starting to get into pragmatic
steps ahead with regard to what could be the criteria looking at
each of the steps of this escalation mechanism and trying to get
us to a clearer pragmatic understanding what could be ways to
participate in step one, step two, step three, and so on and so
forth. And also look at our text and our experience how we
worked in the CCWG, distill the elements that were guiding us in

Page 27 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

this work and form this in a first zero draft whatever concept of
our participation. Would that be -- Yes, thank you, Tom.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, I think, Thomas.
The outline of the issues that we in ACIG undertook and put in
the brief was based on, you know, a continuing involvement in
the development of the bylaws. Not as extensive as many of the
GAC members, but nonetheless, we've got a good grasp, I hope,
of the -- both the legal requirements but also the political and
policy issues as well.
It would certainly be possible to take the mapping
documentation and the outline in the brief that we prepared for
this meeting and use that as the basis for a set of principles, as
has been suggested by a number of members, and also to look
at a potential time line and operational issues for the different
phases in the escalation process of complaints and objections
within the new process. That can be done.
However, from a point of view of simply getting work done
within the GAC and proper process, I think we as the secretariat
would find it extremely helpful to have the guidance and,
indeed, oversight of a small group of interested GAC members to
assist with that.

Page 28 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

I suppose a drafting team is the sort of thing that I'm suggesting.
We can certainly provide that support and, indeed, do the
drafting, but it would be better, I think, if that were guided by a
group of GAC members who are able to work with us and to give
us direction and, indeed, to stay in touch with the rest of the GAC
as this very important issue develops between now and the next
few months.
So I guess that's a long way of saying: Yes, we're happy to help.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tom, and we're happy that you're happy to help.
And I think, yeah, it would be good to gather an informal team
supporting Tom on this and sharing your experience from the
discussions that we've had on this so far.
Brazil.

BRAZIL:

Thank you, Chair. I would like to thank the colleague from
Swaziland for raising the question, the very important question,
because somehow I have the feeling that we are going back to
the discussions we have held in Marrakech and, like, discussing
issues that were already settled by then. So I think we should
now look forward, based on the decision that we have made. It

Page 29 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

was a decision very difficult to reach, based on concessions from
all sides. So I think otherwise we will be reopening issues that
we -- have already been settled.
So the decision was that the GAC accept its role as a decisional
participant. Now we need to discuss how we will put this in
practice. But there is a decision that we will be a decisional
participant, and that's settled. I think no discussion about that.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Brazil. Iran?

IRAN:

Thank you, Chairman.
I think we need to exactly read the communique, what we said.
We have not said as Brazil said. This is not in the communique.
There is a qualifier.
So we have to read what we have agreed exactly. We don't want
to create a decision among the GAC. We have to maintain the
convergence that we had, and we have to stick to the text of the
communique, and the text of the communique is not exactly to
what was said. Thank you.

Page 30 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you. I think we all agree that we should move forward
and not reopen things that were closed, but of course
diplomatic language is diplomatic language and there's always
some room for interpretation, but I think the point is that we
should build on the common ground and start from there, and
the divergence will then move to the edges, which is natural, but
I think this is the way to proceed.
So I think we agree that we -- we note that we don't agree on all
the details, but that's life and we build from the commonalities
and...
Yes, Switzerland.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you very much for giving me the floor.
Perhaps in this vein of looking forward and being pragmatic,
once again, I think that we have in the new bylaws, which will
enter into effect in October, I guess, if -- whether the transition
takes part or not, the -- this is part of the accountability reforms,
and in these bylaws and in the procedures set out, we already
have the time frames.
So what we have to do is to adjust how we participate within
these time frames, and that's one part of our business and we
can do that.

Page 31 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

And it's -- I think there's no issue in that, because we have
agreed many, many times that either advisory or decisional, we
will participate therein.
So that part, that we participate and how -- how we participate,
in what time frames, we can do. We have to map the -- the
bylaws into our working procedures and into the operating
principles, if need be.
And then there is the other question, and, well, we could all read
what we said in Marrakech but we said something like "We
express our willingness to participate as a decisional participant
under conditions to be determined internally," which is, once
again, one of these beautiful diplomatic languages and wordings
we like to use here in the GAC, and -- but also in other
constituencies of ICANN, if you just take a little bit of time to look
at the wording.
So there's a willingness to be a decisional participant and
conditions to be determined internally.
And also, piggybacking on what our Danish colleague said
before, while the issues are -- on what the conditions have to be,
if they are very, very strict, then we will only participate as a
decisional participant in a small percentage of cases or not the
issues at the very last stages. There was a time when we had in
this engagement an escalation mechanism, like nine steps. I

Page 32 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

don't know how many steps they are in the end. I haven't
counted them. But the issue related to the last steps.
So the issue of contention.
So I think that we can map the procedures. In the first steps, we
shouldn't have an issue because there we are not deciding
things; we are really participating in a conversation with the rest
of the community. And when we have all this on paper, we will
then have to decide, okay. And this last decision on whether at
Step 7, 8, and 9 we are decisional, whether our voice counts or
it's only a voice, what conditions we attach to this, we will have
to discuss.
But I think we should focus things and be pragmatic and go as
far as possible and really limit the fields or the topics where we
have disagreements and where we have to work out solutions to
what is really necessary and not reopen everything because that
wouldn't really make sense. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Switzerland.
And I think a good point is also what Iran has mentioned, that
we -- like we are trying to follow how the GNSO is doing this. I
think of particular interest are the other advisory committees, in
particular the ALAC, because as Iran has said, that's probably the

Page 33 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

closest to our situation in terms of our role in ICANN, with some
differences as Iran has mentioned.
Other input? Questions? Pragmatic proposals?
Yes, Indonesia.

INDONESIA:

Just a short question for you, Tom.
I think we are -- basically I agree with what Iran mentioned that
we have -- we need to meet, you know, face-to-face. I mean, as a
matter of fact, I asked several of our colleagues here what you
mean by this, what you mean by that, really, you know. With
this, you can -- I can do that by email, but it's different.
But what I would like to know, what's your -- how you make the
approach for decision. Like what you mentioned, you -- we
agree that we cannot fulfill everybody's -- what everybody
wants, but we share the commonalities of the GAC to get a
decision.
But it is -- I basically agree with what you mentioned, but if there
is -- but if there is a problem where a particular countries -country or some particular countries really have a strong
disagreement, then I think we should consider this, and I think
we have done this many times before.

Page 34 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

We have a problem of .SPA, .ISLAM, for example, the use of .ID for
(indiscernible), you know, GNSO, other that we do not want. We
use .ID for Google, perhaps it's okay, but -- or if .ID.LGBT might
not be okay in Indonesia. You know, that's things that we have
to consider. A strong -- particular strong disagreement from one
or many -- several countries. Thank you, though.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Ashwin.
Well, I think let us -- obviously we -- nobody is planning to
deviate from a consensus-based approach in the GAC. We are
now forced to redefine or tweak our working principles and
operating principles, in the sense that we may be -- have to be
clearer than we have been before whether something is -- a
decision is based on full consensus where nobody objects,
whether something is based on a -- on a strong consensus or
whatever, or whether there are totally divergent views. We will
need to qualify more when we say something, in particular, with
regard to an advice how the -- the -- the views are -- or how
united the GAC is on something, whereas that was not formerly
required so far.
But we did it -- we did it in the past as well. What we -- what we
were formerly required to do in the case that there was no
consensus that the GAC chair would have had to reflect all the

Page 35 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

views, the diversity of views, which is what had been done, but
the notion of consensus was not defined in that sense, or not
defined in -- on the bylaws level, at least. And I think as the -- as
the recommendation of the CCWG proposal that is related to
GAC consensus gives us some scope to deal with what Iran has
said, to try and prevent one country or a very small number of
countries to block a decision or an opinion of the GAC forever,
we have to spend some time on how to make that workable. I
think we all agree on the -- on the concept. We may have to fight
for agreeing on something that is actually then turned into a
mechanism.
So there's work ahead, but, yeah, I think we -- we have heard
each other, we know what is to do, we know where we agree, we
know

where

we

may

have

different

expectations

or

interpretations, and I think we just need to start doing the work
and then sort things out as they appear in the discussion.
So unless there is a -- there are more people who want to take
the floor, we then maybe move on to the next session. I have -- I
see the U.K. and Iran. Thank you.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Thank you, Chair. I thought it might be just useful to
remind ourselves that when an issue is going through an
escalation path, it's going through different steps, you know. So

Page 36 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

it's not like an issue will suddenly come out of the blue and then
we have to decide, you know, as a decisional participant.
There will be a long -- I don't know how long, it may vary
considerably.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

There will be 347 days, the whole process.

UNITED KINGDOM:

There will be a forum phase where we will be actively engaged
and also obviously then the GAC discussing, considering, trying
to work out an alignment of a position.
So there will be plenty of opportunities to try and resolve
differences of position. So I add that as a point of optimism. But
when I mentioned earlier that some windows for decisions are
going to be happening when perhaps there is no physical
meeting, that's just one part of the escalation path. And there I
think we can, you know, be agile. As you've said, we have some
experience of being able to take a decision. But there will be a
longer phase or set of phases before that.
I hope that's helpful. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:
Page 37 of 42

Yes, it is, actually.

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

And as you say, there will probably not be surprises. And the
process is actually set up that way, that these things take some
time to discuss and think. And we will have to anticipate and we
will be able to anticipate that in case something would go more
steps up, then you organize yours in a way that you try to do
whatever you can do. Discuss controversial things in a physical
meeting in order to prepare for, in case, blah, blah, blah.
And we also, we don't know whether -- I mean, these are, let's
say, escalation mechanisms. So I think one of the intents or
purposes of these escalation mechanisms is actually also to
have them serve as a disciplinatory element that we may never
have to get to a stage to actually have to apply them. So this is
also something that actually has an effect; the fact that the
mechanism exists has an effect on the work ahead. And if
people are conscious of this and you actually work in a way that
you try to avoid to have to use these mechanisms. So we will
also have to take stock at some point in time, after two, three
years, how many cases we have actually had.
So I think we shouldn't hyperventilate in the dark for no reason.
Of course we need to prepare, but, yeah, let's adjust our
expectations and hopes and fears, also, on an actual basis of
how much, how many issues do we talk about that may enter
into this process at all? And how many of them will actually end
up in a final stage? Maybe it's none. May be it's a few. We'll see.

Page 38 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

Thank you very much.
So I think Iran was the next one on the list.

IRAN:

Yes, Chairman.

The first thing we have to do, we have to

translate the part of communique in Marrakech relating to this
issue.
The GAC willing to participate in decision-making under the
condition yet to be defined.

So we have to define those

conditions.
The reason I asked the floor was not this. It's the following one
that we have not been discussed.
Suppose that condition are specified, and now we have to
participate based on those conditions in a particular issue.
If there is a virtual meeting, the problem is to have consensus in
a virtual meeting, as far as I experience in other U.N.
organization, is very difficult because you don't know the one
who participate has any authority to express the views of that
particular government, nor the (indiscernible), unless you
specify in that particular meeting that the purpose of this
meeting is to consult various GAC member on this issue;

Page 39 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

therefore, the person who speaks or who send the email has this
authority. Otherwise, you may face a difficulty.
We had this exactly in other U.N. organization. That is why email
voting and virtual voting in particular issues like this is not
authorized.

You need to have a specific authorization or

delegations. If you are physically meeting, no problem. The
delegates who speak as a GAC member, he has this delegation
because he is physically, but the one who is on the email, he
might be someone else.
So that is an important issue that you need to take into account
if you face that problem in future.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Kavouss, for raising this. And of course you're right.
On the other hand, there is technical progress and there are new
ways of buying things, of making contracts compared to 20
years ago.

And of course these are serious issues and we

shouldn't be too loose with these things, but I think if this is
properly prepared and communicated and GAC members are
aware of what would be required for them to actually have
equivalent rights or authorizations, in the end, if you need an
authorization, you need an authorization whether you take the

Page 40 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

decision sitting behind your computer on the phone or sitting
somewhere at the other end of the world in a room.
The idea is the same. We just need to adapt, also, and there may
be some work that needs to be done internally in every country's
administration, that we may need to fight for having these
authorizations for a teleconference. But that is once this, like,
technological shift has happened, I think that will become
normal.
The only thing that you cannot do, you cannot physically lock
people into a room and physically force them to agree on
something if they are not in one room.

That is the only

difference I see, which is a difference, but all the rest, may be
work to do but it is not impossible to sort out.
I think time is up for now. That was a constructive discussion.
We have a lot of work ahead of us. Tom will help us with this,
and everybody is invited to support him, to support us. And so
I'm looking forward to us making progress on this.
Maybe one word about the Customer Standing Committee. To
benefit also from the fact that we are gathered here physically,
maybe we could sort out in one minute the question whether or
not we have -- we would want to have a liaison.

That is

something that I think, since I have not heard any objection to it,
could we quickly validate that we are planning to appoint or to

Page 41 of 42

HELSINKI – CWG Stewardship, CCWG Accountability and GAC Next Steps (2nd Session)

EN

propose one or two liaisons to the -- to the PTI structure? I think
it's the CWG who has been asking or the ICG who has been
asking us. So that we will that we will spend the next two weeks
after this meeting in trying to see who that will be but that we
can take the decision now that there will be a GAC liaison to this
CSC.
I see people nodding. I see no objections. So that's done. Okay.
That's the advantage of physical meetings; that you can do -when there's agreement, you can do things rather quickly.
Thank you very much.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 42 of 42

