HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 13:30 to 14:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Hello. Please take your seats. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you all for taking your seats. This is the first
afternoon session on the CCT, the consumer choice review team,
competition trust and consumer choice review team, which has
been formed by the end of last year. And we are happy to have
the chairman of this review team with us. It is Jonathan sitting
next to me for those who don't know him. And he will start
giving us some insight about how far they have come. So far it's
like the midterm of that review. Supposed to be completed by
the end of the year, if I'm not mistaken. You are not 100%
convinced but not saying anything about the deadline.
So the floor is yours. Thank you, Jonathan.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thank you, Thomas. Thanks for having me here. And thanks to
the GAC for paying attention to what we're doing at the CCT
review. I'm joined here by Megan and Laureen with whom you
are very familiar that are part of the review team and also
Jordyn Buchanan and David Taylor in the room. So lots of
people to ask questions of after we have had a chance to go over

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

the basics of the review. This particular review is somewhat
unique in that work actually began with a board resolution in
Cartagena, Colombia some five years ago when a board
resolution was passed to begin to develop metrics that could be
used for the review team to do its work and to begin to collect
data.
So there was a working group followed by an implementation
group that directed the staff to begin to collect various metrics
that would be relevant to the review.
And then another significant thing that came out of that
preparatory process was a pair of economic studies and surveys.
And so there was a lot of interest by the initial working group in
having some analysis done of pricing in the new gTLD space.
And so there was a pricing study that's been performed by
Analysis Group. So there was -- the idea was to create one study
that would happen before the program began, which was
almost the case -- it happened very early in the program -- and
then another one a year later to see if there was some kind of a
delta between the two versions of the study.
And there was a survey -- sort of two surveys, one of end users
and one of registrants, in looking at the issues of consumer trust
that was done in the same way, you know, a year ago and now
again a year later.

Page 2 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

So where we are with those, I'll mention it briefly in the
presentation, is that we've gotten the second -- the first version
of all of them and we've gotten the second version of the end
user survey. And we're now waiting on the second versions of
the economic study and the registrant surveys.
So those are sort of the things that were happening up -- before
the team was even convened, which, as Thomas mentioned,
happened in December. And so that's where our story begins, if
you will.
So I guess someone's on the slides and I can just say "next slide."
Is that right? I wasn't handed a clicker, so it's the assumption
I'm going on. All right.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(off microphone).
[ Laughter ]

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Exactly.
So the review is referred to as the CCT review. And so we mostly
talk about this notion of consumer choice, consumer trust, and
competition in the DNS space. But there are additional aspects
to the review as well. One is to evaluate the effectiveness of the

Page 3 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

application and evaluation process. And as is the case in many
reviews, the notion of effectiveness kind of goes undefined. And
so the teams have to come up with their own definition, which
we'll discuss. And the other is to evaluate the effectiveness of
the safeguards. So this is sort of the broad scope of the review, if
you will.
Next slide.
So one of the things that we had that were relatively new, I
think, in the world of reviews and perhaps the world of ICANN is
to employ a bit of rigger when it came to our findings and
wherever possible make them quantitative and evidence-based
findings, less anecdotal, less sort of guessing and more about
forming hypotheses and then trying to prove them with
quantitative evidence, wherever possible. That's not always
possible, but that's what we're trying to do.
And one of the things that that facilitates then is making
recommendations that can have measurable success metrics
associated with them. So then the review of -- the next review of
these things can look back at the metrics that were used in the
findings to see if there's a change to them to see if there was
some effectiveness to the recommendations that were made.
So that's a challenge in and of itself and getting the data, et
cetera. But that's one of the things that this team is trying to do.

Page 4 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

And then, finally, something else that's new with this is that the
team is going to stay together after the presentation of its
recommendations in order to provide a kind of advisory role
during implementation.
One of the issues that's come up during the ATRT
recommendation implementation periods is that the team
disbands and then later sort of piecemeal comes back to staff
and says, "That's not what we meant when things get
implemented." So the idea is for the team to sort of remain in an
advisory role to staff when things are being implemented.
So all those things aren't always possible, but those are the
objectives -- the procedural objectives of this team.
Next slide, please.
We divided into three subteams in order to divide up the work a
little bit for the review. One is a competition and consumer
choice subteam, which is chaired by Jordyn Buchanan. One is a
safeguards and trust team chaired by Laureen Kapin here. And
then there is an application and evaluation process subteam
which is sort of funny because it's more like a work stream
because everybody's in it. And I have taken on the role of trying
to shepherd that part of the review. So those are the three
teams.

Page 5 of 27

EN

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

And what we did at our first face-to-face in Los Angeles early in
the year was try to define our own scope. So that becomes the
responsibility of every review team, is to not to try to boil the
ocean, if you will, but instead to figure out what areas there are
of highest import and focus on those issues for the course of the
review. So next slide.
For example, the competition and consumer choice team boiled
it down to these questions. Has the expansion of new gTLDs
been effective at promoting price competition between TLD
operators? Has the expansion been effective at promoting nonprice competition between TLD operators? What's the nature of
competition

between

registrars

and

resellers?

segmentation/regulation valuable to consumers?

Is

In other

words, is making the difference between -- you know, like .BANK
or something like that, something that's valuable to consumers.
Have the benefits exceeded the costs?
And, finally, do consumers have expanded choice in regions and
languages? So those were the issues that the competition and
consumer choice subteam decided to focus on.
Next slide, please.

Page 6 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

In the safeguards and trust team, there was a number of issues
as well. One is around DNS abuse. Is it more or less prevalent in
the new gTLDs? This is a hot topic.
What do DNS abuse policies look like?
What enforcement mechanisms are in place?
What role has compliance has been playing since the new gTLDs
have been allocated? And what kind of abuse complaints have
existed?
The impact of safeguards and public interest commitments. In
other words, you know, how is GAC advice brought in? What sort
of right protection mechanisms? And, you know, how effective
were those safeguards?
Consumer and end user behavior, so this is one of the more
complicated things. When we were asked to evaluate consumer
trust, the wording is, Was consumer trust enhanced, right? And
there's a lot of ways of looking at that.
So the Implementation Advisory Group thought that the only
way to measure consumer trust would be to ask consumers.
Hence, the survey that Nielsen performed before and after of
consumers sort of asking them, basically, straight out: Do you
trust the new gTLDs relative to the legacy TLDs, et cetera? And
that's a complicated issue because there's a lot of things built

Page 7 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

into that about whether they're even aware of it yet. And there's
a higher trust for .EMAIL, for example, than there is for the other
new gTLDs. And most of you know that .EMAIL didn't happen.
So there's always some potential for error in the way that
consumers look at these issues.
But we do have two sets of studies. There are some interesting
findings associated with it that suggest that there's a high level
of trust of the DNS industry, which we will regard as a good thing
and that trust at least has not been eroded.
But in lieu of finding some significant delta, positive or negative,
associated with consumer trust, what we also are trying to do is
look at proxies for trust. And so you might think of it instead of
consumer trust, consumer trust worthiness, right? Was the new
gTLD program worthy of end user trust? And so trying to look at
some of the things like DNS abuse, et cetera, to see if consumers
should trust the new gTLDs more or less than the legacy ones.
So there's going to be some discussion of both of those that
takes place in the safeguards and trust team.
Then there's, finally, this issue of effectiveness and procedures
to enforce safeguards, what ICANN's role is, and the dispute
resolution process. As you can see, that's a pretty big chunk of
topics that Laureen's group has agreed to take on.
Next slide.

Page 8 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

And in the application/evaluation process, again, this became
very clarifying in its scope vis-a-vis the PDP on subsequent
procedures which was launched at relatively the same time.
Because the number of things that you can look at, and in
general should look at, in terms of the application evaluation
process is quite broad. And the PDP process is going to look at
every little mechanical implementation, improvements to the
guidebook, et cetera.
And so what we were able to do was kind of prioritize topics that
the review team would look at and the PDP process will take as
inputs from us as they begin to adopt new policy with regard to
any subsequent procedures.
And so as you'll see here, this list is smaller than the overall list
might be in terms of the looking at the application and
evaluation process.
One of the things that came up most frequently in the
brainstorming process was who got left out of the application
process. So underserved areas and markets, people that were
outsiders to the ICANN community that weren't -- that weren't
aware either that it was going on; or if they were aware it was
going on, didn't really understand the politics of ICANN, didn't
have a good consultant to guide them through the process of

Page 9 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

applying, et cetera. So trying to find the people that were left
out of the process.
And then the other issues, preventing the delegation of TLDs
that would be confusing or harmful, singulars, plurals, things
like that that have been hotly discussed.
Another area that came up -- thanks again to your
representative on the review team Laureen and Megan -- was a
discussion about GAC advice and how that advice came on
board, how it was ingested, and how it was ultimately
implemented during the application process.
Then there's IDNs and how effective they were, string
contention. And then the very notion of rounds itself is a hotly
debated issue. In other words, can we lay at the feet of rounds
most of what went wrong with the first set of new gTLDs? And
are we better off with the process of continuous applications
that come in more slowly? So those are some of the issues being
evaluated by the application and evaluation subteam.
Next slide.
So what we found is that for a lot of these questions, we're going
to actually talk to applicants about them because there's few
things of data sources that we can get to that are third-party

Page 10 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

sources and we need to go right to the source and ask those
questions.
And so you can kind of divide the applicants into three
categories: Successful applicants, those that have delegated
TLDs; unsuccessful applicants that withdrew -- and by
"unsuccessful," those are generally applicants that withdrew all
of the applications that they had, not the ones that succeeded
with some and decided for reasons we don't know to withdraw
others -- and then, finally, the exciting category, the unicorn,
which is the missing applicant, right? People that didn't engage
in the process at all.
So if we look at successful applicants, we are going to kind of
ask what kind of challenges they faced. What sort of help did
they receive from consultants and others in guiding them
through the process so that we gain an understanding of what it
meant to be a successful applicant. And, also, if and how they
were affected by GAC early warnings and advice.
Unsuccessful applicants, what happened? What type of help did
you have? What were the reasons that you left the program so
we can gain an understanding of what it was that motivated
people to withdraw their application.

Page 11 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

And so we have those people. We know who they are. And so
we're going to engage Nielsen to get them on the phone and ask
these questions.
The third category is a little trickier. This is -- this is the people
that didn't apply. And, yet, they seem particularly important to
speak to -- particularly in the global south and developing world
to try and understand why there wasn't more participation from
certain regions of the world in the new gTLD application process.
And so we want to ask questions like: Why didn't you apply?
What would you have needed to be different in order to have
participated in the program?
So what we've done is engaged an outside firm in a very
interesting exercise, which is to analyze the people that did
apply and divide them into categories of companies and entities
and then go out and research what the analogs or cohorts of
those applicants would be in the developing world. So the idea
is to try to figure out who would have applied but for some
change in the system.
There are many theories about this that include that they didn't
know about it; they knew about it but the application process
seemed to onerous; they knew about it, they weren't worried
about the application process, they were worried about the $2
million that it took to actually run a TLD. And then, finally,

Page 12 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

there's even a theory that they knew about it, could afford it but
didn't actually think that there was a market for them to
address, which would be sort of the most innocuous answer we
might get from those cohorts.
And so when we get this list of companies and the right people in
them to talk to, we'll, once again, engage with them and try to
ask these questions about why didn't you apply. And I'm very
excited to have those conversation and see what kinds of
answers we get back because those will really make a difference
in what kind of recommendations that we make. And to be
honest right now, we have no idea. Everyone has a theory, but
ideally we would ask the people themselves.
Next slide.
So as I mentioned earlier, these are the surveys and studies. The
consumer survey, both phase 1 and 2 are available up on the
Wiki. There's a shorthand for our Wiki, which is just cct.wiki.
We're trying to -- as we say in America -- eat our own dogfood by
using new gTLDs. So you can go to cct.wiki and see all that we're
doing. And you can see both sets of consumer surveys.
Again, there wasn't a very big delta between -- in the issues
related to consumer trust. So some of that maybe there just
hasn't been enough time that's passed. Some of it may be there
just wasn't an impact. I think our findings are going to be

Page 13 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

inconclusive about actual consumer reaction to the new gTLD
program.
But it at the same time didn't look like there was any kind of
erosion of trust among consumers, and a very high degree of
trust in the DNS market and the providers, the registries and
registrars that serve consumers.
You can see the registrant survey results from September.
That's -- the second half of that's about to be fielded. And the
economic study results from before the program, and that
second half of that is now in process as well.
And then as you -- as I said, the gTLD applicant survey is
something that we'll be doing very shortly.
Next slide, please.
So time line. As Thomas noted, I'm a little bit reticent about the
time line just because there's a very big research effort
associated with this and when you're dealing with a group of
volunteers, sometimes speed is not at a premium, but we were
scheduled to try and complete the review in a year and we are
going to do everything we can to have a draft report by the end
of the year out for public comment.
So the idea would be around Hyderabad to be talking kind of
explicitly about our findings and recommendations, put out a

Page 14 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

report in December-January that can -- that's a formal one for
public comment, and then sometime in April release a final set
of findings and recommendations for board review. All right?
Next slide.
So we are an open process. It's not open in the same way that
work groups are where everyone can participate directly, but
everyone -- there is a sort of shadow Adobe Connect room for
every one of our calls so that you can observe and listen in on
the call.

And then presumably you have some kind of

representative. In particular, this is the GAC so you have two
very qualified representatives within the group, and that you can
channel your input through them or you can reach out directly
to the whole group through input to cctrc@icann.org.
So you have those options for input. It's just not live during the
calls.
Obviously the transcripts and recordings of all the calls are
available after the fact as well.
So we do welcome your input. If you see that a topic that's of
great interest to you is not being covered, then please let us
know. If you think that we're missing some way in the way that
we're looking at a topic, please let us know as well. We're trying
to do the best review we can to meet the objectives of the

Page 15 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

community in having the ongoing new gTLD program be as
effective as possible.
So with that, I and Megan and Laureen and even David and
Jordyn are happy to take any questions and have any discussion
about the review.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Megan or Laureen, is there something that you
would like to add? Yes.

MEGAN RICHARDS:

Could I just add one thing?
I mean, Jonathan's given a really wonderful and thorough
overview of everything, but I think for this group, there are a
couple of things that I think are perhaps useful.
One is with respect to the studies and the surveys and the data
that we're gathering, and maybe I wasn't listening sufficiently
carefully, Jonathan, but one thing that I think is important to
mention for you too is, to the extent possible -- and I underline
"to the extent possible" -- we're comparing also the results and
the impact on the new gTLDs with the legacy gTLDs and the
ccTLD markets, to see if there's a difference in how that's been
compared.

Page 16 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

But again, to the extent possible. It's not always very easy.
That's one thing I wanted to add for you.
And then the other aspect, just so you understand even better
what Jonathan has already very clearly and well explained is
that for the developing countries and for the cohort, as he
explained, of those who did not apply for the new gTLD round,
two other aspects that are encompassed in the part that he
mentioned already relate to the cost of the application.
He mentioned also, of course, the cost of running the new gTLD
and also the language aspect.
So I just wanted to add those minor aspects to what was really a
very thorough and excellent presentation by Jonathan.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thanks, Megan. I guess I'll add that the actual process for these
cohorts is that we'll probably reach out to a few of them to ask
questions in a kind of a blind way to understand what questions
we should ask the others, so I think we'll come up with kind of
categories through a sort of focus group and then reach out to
the broader group that we get, which is likely to be about 200
companies, and we'll know more about what questions we need
to ask when we've asked a few questions, if that makes sense.

Page 17 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you. So I think we can give us five more minutes for some
questions. Try to be brief.
I see Spain, Denmark, and the U.K., so Spain, please.

SPAIN:

Thank you for the presentation. I wanted to ask about one of
those surveys. I received a message last week, an ICANN news
alert message, about the publication of a survey conducted by
Neilsen on behalf of the CCT. The outcome -- or the findings of
this survey is that there is awareness about new gTLDs and
increased trust in the domain name system, which is a very
surprising outcome for me.
But when I go down, I see that the questions have been posed to
individuals based on the number of hours they spend on the
Internet, so I guess that Neilsen has asked people who are very
familiar with the Internet.
I think that the survey would be more loyal or more
representative of what the average Internet user thinks of the
domain name system if it has been done with users that are not
so familiar with the Internet, who are the ones who are more
prone to be cheated on the Internet or be victims of fraud.
Even though there is a conclusion here saying that more than
70% of respondents favored some level of registration

Page 18 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

restrictions on both legacy and new gTLDs, this is an increase
from 2015, so this is an important result to take into account,
even though I think that maybe the scope of the survey would
have been -- should have been broader.

CHAIRMAN SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think we take the other questions in quickly and
then give you a -- so Denmark, please.

DENMARK:

Thank you. And thank you to Jonathan for a very good and
comprehensive presentation.
I have one question. I don't know whether you touch upon it,
but in the economical study, is there any indication what the
new gTLD rounds have -- have cost on the part of the industry in
the form of defensive registration? Will that be part of the survey
and the report?

CHAIRMAN SCHNEIDER:

U.K.?

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Thank you, Chair, and thank you, Jonathan, Megan, for
giving a comprehensive account of the progress with the review.
And my -- I had two questions. My first question was very much

Page 19 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

in the similar lines to Denmark's with regard to the economic
study. I think there will be a lot of interest in that. I seem to
recall back in 2008-2009, it was a real struggle to get any real
economic analysis out, and the cost/benefits and so on, so really
look forward to the study.
And my question really relating to that was: Will it -- will the
review look at the opportunities for small and medium-size
enterprises? If the costs of application will come down, as many
predicted at the time, from $185,000, will there be an
opportunity for small and medium-size enterprises in -- across
the world, you know -- and I'm thinking also of businesses in
developing countries and so on -- through the creation and
having their own domain names?
So that's my particular focus of interest. Thank you.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Thank you for all your questions. I'll just go in order.
The question about how long people spent on line was not a
filtering question but just a question that could be used to
create cross-tabulation and correlations of results.
So in other words, it's not that they stopped the whole survey if
people didn't spend any time online, but I -- and I think your

Page 20 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

other observations were good about -- about the increase in
trust.
But it felt to me, at least, and everyone is going to have to make
their own assessment, and Laureen's team still has yet to make
their assessment, but my first blush is that none of it was
statistically significant, the differences between the two surveys
in terms of making a real conclusion about an increase in trust,
either of the industry or the new gTLDs.
But as you say, there was something like 70% that thought there
ought to be some kind of restrictions that agreed with things like
.BANK, et cetera, that would allow for greater predictability of
the segmentation of some of the domain names. And so I think
those are significant results in and of themselves, even though
they don't represent a delta, necessarily, from the first survey.
On your second question, it's a very good one. It didn't even
occur to me to mention, but the -- we did talk about the
cost/benefit analysis, and that is going to be part of the job of
the competition and choice team. And so the cost part of that
very often is going to be in the form of defensive registrations.
And one of the things that was interesting is that the work group
and implementation advisory groups both struggle with the
notion of how to measure things like defensive registrations,
and again came up with proxies for them. Like, for example, are

Page 21 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

the new domains just pointers to old ones, for example. Is that
an indicator, potentially, of a defensive registration.
It's not necessarily an exact measure because there's other
reasons you might have a pointer.
And so one of the things we're going to do as well is conduct a
study of brand owners, probably through the INTA organization
to get an understanding of what some of the costs have been
associated with the new gTLD program.
I mean, part of it is the old strategy of straight defensive
registrations has not been economically viable because there's
so many of them, and some of the TLDs have offered alternatives
to defensive registration in the forms of blocking and things like
that. So those costs are coming in different ways than they have
in the past. So we are going to try to do an analysis through a
survey into INTA members to try and gain an understanding of
what some of the monies that have been spent for defensive
purposes.
And then finally, Great Britain, for your last -- your last question
about the cost of applications. One of the things we'll be asking
applicants is the degree to which the cost was a barrier to entry.
There was something called the Applicant Support Program
which was incredibly underused; right? There were very, very

Page 22 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

few applicants and only one that I think actually received the
support.
So it could very well be that the answer will come back that the
intimidating thing was not the application but the idea of
running the TLD in the first place that's actually the cost that
caused the most apprehension among potential applicants, or it
could be that there wasn't sufficient awareness of the applicant
support, and that discussion has been held, you know, down to
very finite detail, like should they have used radio advertising
instead of online advertising in Africa, for example.
So those conversations are definitely part of what we're trying to
evaluate, and we will make recommendations based on
whatever findings we come up with talking to the applicants.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Jonathan. I think we need to stop here and move to
the next session. I would like to conclude by thanking you.
And so just that we get it right.
So the first text that we are going to see is not before the end -or is towards the end of the year. All the rest will be internal
cuisine, if I may say so. And so the good thing is that, however,
people can listen in to your meetings. So please continue to -- as
did you for the meeting, for instance, in early June, to alert the

Page 23 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

GAC when the next meeting is going to be held, and also to
provide for something -- that is two representatives, provide for
some short summary reports after a meeting, like, this is what
we discussed, whatever you think is of interest to the GAC,
highlighting that maybe something is controversial or there's a
new finding. To the extent that you can, give this output since
these meetings are not confidential in that sense, I think we
would benefit from getting a little bit more substance before the
end of the year, because that's going to be very late given that
some people in other constituencies in ICANN are rushing ahead
with preparing the second round. And this is fundamental to
learning lessons for the next round.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

Let me say one more thing on that, I guess, on that. A number of
things will come out along the way, one of which will be the
second economic study that will help a lot. And there is a finer
level of detail that's available now.

For example, the

competition and consumer choice team has gone through and
actually looked at every single hypothesis that they're going to
test. And so you can get a more finite version of the questions
than were presented here.

And the team as a whole will

probably reach -- create a document that we'll roughly call
"findings" which will become available prior to the document
that contains recommendations as well.

Page 24 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

So we'll make those things available in stages as well.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.
Switzerland, 30 seconds, and then we will stop and move on.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you very much, and thank you for the presentation.
Just very shortly, how or how well are you coordinating with the
PDP on subsequent procedures?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Before you answer the question, I have Paraguay again, and
then we really need --

PARAGUAY:

Thank you, Mr. Chair. Very shortly. When is the economic study
or analysis going to be available?
Thank you.

JONATHAN ZUCK:

The study should come out in the fall. So fairly soon. We've
been in long discussions with them about what to do. And there
was a lot of difficulty finding data.

Page 25 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

EN

The registrars were not very forthcoming with data, so we're
having to find some outside sources for data.
The registries are required by contract to provide data, but the
registrars are not, unfortunately.
As far as the PDP on subsequent procedures, we have two
members that are on both. Carlos and Carlton are on both the
review team and in the PDP on subsequent procedures, so
they're acting as liaisons between the two groups. And we have
regular calls every other week, leadership calls between us and
the PDP group. And as I said, we went through a fairly rigorous
process of going through all the universe of topics that the PDP
will be examining, and we kind of claimed some, if you will, that
were the ones that you saw here today as being the high-priority
topics for the review team. And the PDP are kind of waiting to
dive into those until they hear results from us.
So a fairly good level of coordination I think is happening
between the two teams.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Jonathan and Megan and Laureen.
This is the end of this session, and we will immediately jump into
the other one, because Markus and Manal are patiently waiting.
Sorry for that delay.

Page 26 of 27

HELSINKI – Competition, Consumer Trust and Consumer Choice (CCT) Review Team

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 27 of 27

EN

