Christmas Island Domain Administration Limited ( cxDA)
HIGH RISK REGISTRATIONS IDENTIFICATION
PROACTIVE ABUSE MITIGATION

Tools provided by:

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

Initial Try
2012

Mandatory manual domain activation with the central registry
Enforcement
• Registrants received an email from the registry with a one-use link
• The link lead the registrant ( or admin ) back to the registry where they had to
confirm their contact information and agree to the TLD policy
• Until they did so the domain remained un-delegated
Goals
Ensure the registrant email was valid/active
Ensure the registrant agreed with the AUP and other TLD policy
Problems
• The Registrant, having registered the domain via a registrar or reseller often did
not recognize the sender ( the registry ) and was confused or suspicious
• The email was lost in spam folder and never received, forcing the registrar to
activate a domain on behalf of the Registrant
• Reputation or risk factors were ignored

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

2

Refinement
2014

Escrow deposits inspection against abuse databases (paid service)
Implementation
Daily escrow deposits (already being made in ICANN gTLD format) were inspected
and compared against various abuse databases by the escrow agent ( NCC)
The email notification was sent to the registrant in case of any possible abuse.
Drawbacks
• No integration into the registry system ( requires abuse staff to read and
interpret the daily emails ), abuse data is not stored in the registry.
• Significant delays between the registration, deposit and the abuse notification.
• It did not not prevent abuse, it simply prevents abuse from occurring for an
extended period.

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

3

Refinement
2016

Automatic activation for low-risk registrations.
Implementation
Domain registration flow is unchanged from the perspective of the registrar, but
domains are not delegated until checked against the Secure Domain Foundation
database.
Using the SDF API, the registry operator can identify high-risk from low-risk
registrations shortly after registration ( within a minute ). Low-risk domains are
automatically delegated, high-risk domain are flagged for manual activation.
Benefits
No delay in delegation for domains that are considered low-risk.
Significant reduction in the registry – registrant communications - which can cause
confusion on the part of the registrant and increases the manual workload for
registrars.
An additional step allows registry review the high risk transactions manually if
desired.

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

4

What CoCCA looks for at
registration and renewal

E-mail
Has the full email address ( name@domain .tld ) been
associated with abuse ?
CoCCA will then dig a little further …
• Has the domain or user name associated with any of the
contacts the email been associated with abuse ?
• Has the mx server associated with domain been
associated with abuse ?
Name Servers
Has the name server, or the name server IP address been
associated with abuse ?

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

5

What CoCCA looks for
in manual activations

• CoCCA tracks / logs the IP address of the entity activating
the domain.
• IP is checked against the SDF database
• When IP is associated with abuse an administrator at the
registry level ( or the registrar depending on the policy
matrix) will be required to activate the domain.

Continuous Scans

In addition to the checks shortly after registration or renewal,
CoCCA performs a continuous scan of the SDF database and
comparison with the SDF database so that if there is
evidence of abuse after registration it will be picked up.
In case any matches ,CoCCA sends an email to administrators
and abuse agents to review.

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

6

Policy Considerations TLD / registry manger will likely have to assume a more active “trust but
verify” role mitigating abuse at the registry level.
This “trust but verify” approach may require some modifications to the
registrant agreement ( if the TLD manager has one ) and / or the registrar
agreement.
With the increasing use gateways the registrants often do not know who
the registrar is, they are only familiar with the reseller they registered
through.
When the registry is communicating with the registrant, if the registrant
has registered via a reseller the communication should mention the
reseller.
The above is only possible if the registry system allows the registry to
create and associate registrations with a reseller as well as the registrar.
ICANN56 | HELSINKI

7

How to Configure

The SDF API can be connected to by any registry
operator.
If you are using the CoCCA software the SDF integration
and activation tools are built-in to the current version
available from https://wiki.cocca.org.nz
Configuration in CoCCA:
Step 1- Configure the SDF connection
Step 2- Enable “Require Activation” for the zone
Step 3-.Select “High Risk Only” on the Activation
configuration page.

8

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

Step 1
Configuration > External Verification Systems

Step 2
Zone > Details

9

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

Step 3
Zone > Activation Settings

If a registration is flagged admins will get an email and it will appear in the top
Right menu when you login.

10

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

CoCCA
Manual Activation
Step 1

11

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

CoCCA
Manual Activation
Step 2

12

ICANN56 | HELSINKI

