SUMMARY	OF	THE	LIFECYCLE	OF	A	TYPICAL	CCWG:	
	
1. Initiation	of	CCWG	
Two	or	more	Supporting	Organization(s)	and/or	Advisory	Committee(s)	make	a	
determination	that	a	CCWG	is	the	proper	vehicle	to	resolve	the	issue	that	has	been	
identified.		
	
Questions	to	ask	in	this	phase	include:		
• is	the	issue	within	the	scope	of	policy	development	for	a	specific	SO	or	within	the	
specific	remit	of	an	SO/AC;		
• does	the	issue	cut	across	different	SO/ACs;		
• is	there	broad	community	interest	to	engage	on	this	topic;		
• whether	resolving	this	issue	will	have	a	substantial	budgetary	impact;		
• are	there	sufficient	community	and	staff	resources	available	to	form	and	support	a	
CCWG;		
• are	the	deliverables	intended	to	be	submitted	to	the	ICANN	Board	for	action.		
	
2. Formation	of	CCWG	
Following	interest	from	at	least	two	or	more	SO/ACs,	Drafting	Team	is	formed	to	develop	a	
draft	Charter.	
	
DT	to	be	kept	small,	composed	of	representatives	from	interested	SO/ACs.	
	
Only	after	adoption	of	the	Charter	by	at	least	two	or	more	SOs/ACs	is	the	CCWG	created	
and	the	SOs/ACs	who	adopted	the	Charter	deemed	to	be	its	Chartering	Organizations.		
	
3. Operation	of	CCWG		
Work	plan	developed	and	shared	with	Chartering	Organizations.		
	
CCWG	is	expected	to	provide	regular	updates	to	the	Chartering	Organizations	(may	be	via	
appointed	members).	
	
Once	CCWG	has	consensus	on	proposed	final	deliverables	(in	accordance	with	the	decisionmaking	process	in	the	Charter,	these	are	submitted	to	each	Chartering	Organization	for	
approval/adoption/support/non-objection	(as	appropriate).	
	
4. Decision	Making	by	a	CCWG		
Decision	making	methodology	(including	the	definition	and	designation	of	“consensus”)	to	
be	set	out	clearly	in	the	CCWG	Charter.		
	
Voting	and	final	decisions	are	to	be	taken	by	appointed	members	(not	observers	or	nonmember	participants)	of	a	CCWG	(though	CCWG	Chair(s)	should	have	flexibility	and	
authority	to	obtain	the	views	of	non-member	participants	and	observers	in	the	process.	

	

	
	
	

5. Adoption	of	Final	Recommendations	by	Chartering	Organizations	and	Closure	of	
CCWG		
Chartering	Organizations	review	CCWG	output	to	determine	whether	it	can	approve,	adopt,	
support	and/or	(at	minimum)	not	object	(each	in	accordance	with	its	own	rules	and	
processes.		
	
Only	after	these	decisions	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	have	been	made	can	further	
steps	(e.g.	implementation,	submission	of	recommendations	to	the	Board)	be	taken.		
	
CCWG	normally	closed	once	the	final	CCWG	outputs	have	been	formally	accepted	by	the	
Chartering	Organizations	(but	note	that	CCWG	may	have	role	in	implementation,	if	specified	
in	final	recommendations	and	accepted	by	Chartering	Organizations).		
	
Alternative	1:	The	CCWG	may	close	once	the	Chartering	Organizations	have	taken	a	final	
decision	that	the	final	CCWG	output	cannot	be	approved/supported,	with	the	co-chairs	
of	the	CCWG	informed	accordingly.			
	
Alternative	2:	In	the	event	the	Chartering	Organizations	are	informed	by	the	Chair(s)	of	
the	CCWG	that	the	CCWG	is	not	able	to	reach	a	consensus	position	on	a	key	deliverable,	
the	Chartering	Organizations	may	close	the	CCWG.	
	
6. Post-Closure	of	CCWG	-	Implementation	
Implementation	monitored	against	the	success	criteria	identified	previously	by	the	CCWG	(if	
any).		
	
In	developing	the	criteria,	CCWG	should,	if	appropriate,	adopt	the	2015	GNSO	Policy	&	
Implementation	Principles	that	were	developed	by	the	GNSO	and	approved	by	the	ICANN	
Board	in	2015,	to	the	extent	they	are	applicable.		
	
CCWG	to	specify	in	its	output	if	it	believes	it	needs	to	be	involved	in	implementation,	and	
how;	this	must	be	accepted	by	all	its	Chartering	Organizations	who	should	request	a	
timeline	and	specific	task	list.	

