A	Uniform	Framework	of	Principles	and	
Recommendations	for	Cross	
Community	Working	Groups	(CCWG)	
1.0	Introduction	
	
The	Cross	Community	Working	Group	(CCWG)	is	a	mechanism	to	allow	any	number	of	
ICANN’s	Supporting	Organizations	(SOs)	and	Advisory	Committees	(ACs)	to	work	
together	to	address	issues	that	are	of	common	interest	and	that	do	not	fall	within	the	
sole	remit	of	one	SO	or	AC.	This	document	is	intended	to	provide	a	general	framework	
for	the	establishment,	operations	and	closure	of	CCWGs.	The	framework	is	not	intended	
to	be	a	set	of	rigid	binding	principles	to	be	followed	in	all	cases,	but	rather	is	a	collection	
of	community-agreed	guidelines	that	will	frame	the	scope	of,	and	create	uniform	shared	
principles	for,	future	CCWGs.	Nevertheless,	certain	principles	that	are	considered	
fundamental	or	crucial	to	the	effective	functioning	of	a	CCWG	are	highlighted	as	such	in	
the	text	that	follows.		
	
This	framework	draws	extensively	upon	lessons	learned	from	previous	CCWG	efforts	
and	is	expected	to	serve	as	best	practices	for	future	CCWGs.	In	particular,	the	most	
recent	community	experiences	in	relation	to	the	IANA	Stewardship	Transition	and	
related	Enhancing	ICANN	Accountability	CCWGs	provided	substantial	guidance	for	the	
development	of	this	framework.	In	reviewing	and	applying	this	framework,	however,	
the	community	is	reminded	that	these	two	most	recent	cross	community	efforts	
represent	the	exception,	rather	than	the	norm,	for	CCWGs	in	terms	of	their	subject	
matter,	group	size	and	intensive	resource	usage.		
	
A	draft	CCWG	Charter	Template	can	be	found	in	Annex	A	of	this	document,	which	aims	
to	translate	these	best	practices	into	a	potential	starting	point	for	future	drafting	teams	
creating	charter	documents	for	future	CCWG	efforts.		
	

Fundamental	Concepts	
	
Based	on	analysis,	experience,	and	discussions	within	the	community	to	date,	a	CCWG	is	
expected	to	have	the	following	basic	characteristics:	
	
• Two	or	more	Supporting	Organizations	or	Advisory	Committees	adopt	a	single	
Charter,	and	are	hence	known	as	Chartering	Organizations.		

	

1	

•
•

•
•
•

•
•
•

•

•

The	Charter	is	drafted	by	a	cross	community	drafting	team	comprising	
participants	from	all	SO/ACs	that	have	indicated	interest	in	participating	in	the	
CCWG.	
In	drafting	the	proposed	CCWG	Charter,	the	drafting	team	is	expected	to	rely	on	
the	principles	and	recommendations	contained	in	this	Framework	document	
(including	the	draft	Charter	Template);	however,	the	drafting	team	and	the	
Chartering	Organizations	should	also	have	the	flexibility	of	adapting	and	
modifying	the	principles,	recommendations	and	template	provisions	to	suit	the	
subject	matter	and	intended	outcomes	of	the	CCWG	in	question.	
The	CCWG	(e.g.	members,	participants,	others)	is	expected	to	conduct	its	
business	in	accordance	with	the	terms	and	within	the	scope	of	the	adopted	
Charter.	
Chartering	Organizations	each	appoint	members	according	to	their	own	rules	
and	procedures,	including	the	need	to	provide	for	a	Statement	of	Interest	(SOI)	
or	its	equivalent.		
In	appointing	members	to	a	CCWG,	Chartering	Organizations	are	expected	to	
consult	with	one	another	to	ensure	that	there	is	diversity	of	representation	to	
the	extent	feasible	–	including	but	not	limited	to	geographical	region,	
stakeholder	group	and	relevant	skill	sets	–	in	the	overall	CCWG	membership.	
SO/AC	appointed	members	are	responsible	for	reporting	regularly	to	their	
respective	Chartering	Organizations.	
Any	differences	in	appointment	or	roles	of	Working	Group	members	and	
participants	are	to	be	outlined	in	the	Charter.	
The	deliverables	of	the	WG	are	submitted	to	all	the	Chartering	Organizations	for	
adoption/approval/support/non-objection.	Following	this	step,	in	most	
instances,	the	deliverables	are	then	submitted	to	the	ICANN	Board	for	its	
consideration.		
In	principle,	adoption/approval/support/non-objection	by	all	Chartering	
Organizations	is	required	before	a	final	deliverable	is	deemed	to	be	the	CCWGapproved	output	or	deliverable.	In	adopting/approving/supporting	or	not	
objecting	to	the	final	deliverable,	a	Chartering	Organization	shall	not	change	the	
content.	If	it	objects	to	part	of	or	the	whole	final	deliverable	it	shall	notify	the	
CCWG	and	the	other	Chartering	Organizations.	If	the	final	deliverable	of	the	
CCWG	is	supposed	to	be	submitted	to	the	ICANN	Board	or	other	entities	it	may	
only	be	submitted	if	it	fulfils	all	the	criteria	necessary	for	it	to	be	deemed	to	be	a	
CCWG	approved	output.	
Sufficient	opportunity	should	be	provided	for	those	SO/ACs	not	participating	as	
Chartering	Organizations	as	well	as	others	to	provide	input	and/or	comment	on	
draft	CCWG	deliverables.	

	
Additionally,	before	initiating	a	CCWG,	the	following	critical	points	need	to	be	
considered:	
1. Determine	whether	or	not	the	CCWG	is	the	best	mechanism	to	address	the	issue.		

	

2	

Deleted: e.g.	of
Comment [MW1]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

2. If	yes,	determine	if	the	potential	Chartering	Organizations	are	able	to	adopt	a	
shared	Charter	(e.g.,	if	the	topic	is	within	scope	of	the	organizations,	if	there	is	
interest	in	the	topic,	etc.)	and	whether	sufficient	resources,	both	community	as	
well	as	staff,	are	available	to	undertake	this	effort.	This	should	be	further	
clarified	as	far	as	possible	during	the	Charter	drafting	phase,	during	which	
questions	relating	to	any	anticipated	additional	budget	or	other	resources	
needed	by	the	CCWG	should	also	be	discussed.	
3. Consider	if	the	participating	organizations	believe	that	they	will	be	able	to	
adopt/approve/support/not	object	to	CCWG	output	that	represents	the	
consensus	of	the	CCWG.		
4. Discuss	and	agree	on	the	circumstances	and	appropriate	contexts	in	which	the	
CCWG’s	final	recommendations	need	to	be	submitted	to,	and	possibly	acted	on,	
by	the	ICANN	Board.	Where	the	ICANN	Board	is	expected	to	take	action	on	a	
CCWG’s	final	recommendations,	this	should	be	specified	in	the	final	CCWG	
Charter,	and	the	CCWG’s	proposals	published	for	public	comment.	

Comment [MW2]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

Comment [MW3]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

2.0	High	Level	Description	of	the	Cross	Community	Working	
Group	(CCWG)	Life	Cycle	
	
The	process	flow	below	is	intended	to	show	the	entire	life	cycle,	based	on	recent	
experiences,	of	a	CCWG	at	a	high	level.	Each	of	the	five	elements	of	the	life	cycle	is	
discussed	individually	in	further	detail	in	Section	3.0:	
	
1. Initiation	of	CCWG	–	Two	or	more	Supporting	Organization(s)	and/or	Advisory	
Committee(s)	make	a	determination	that	a	CCWG	is	the	proper	vehicle	to	resolve	
the	issue	that	has	been	identified.	Some	of	the	questions	that	are	relevant	to	
make	such	a	determination	are:	is	the	issue	within	the	scope	of	policy	
development	for	a	specific	SO	or	within	the	specific	remit	of	an	SO/AC;	does	the	
issue	cut	across	different	SO/ACs;	is	there	broad	community	interest	to	engage	
on	this	topic;	whether	resolving	this	issue	will	have	a	substantial	budgetary	
impact	and	are	there	sufficient	community	and	staff	resources	available	to	form	
and	support	a	CCWG;	and	are	the	deliverables	intended	to	be	submitted	to	the	
ICANN	Board	for	action/consideration.	It	is	important	to	note	that	a	CCWG	is	not	
the	proper	vehicle	for	formal	policy	development	where	such	authority	has	been	
granted	under	the	ICANN	Bylaws	to	a	specific	Supporting	Organization.		
	
2. Formation	of	CCWG	–	After	considering	the	questions	above	(including	that	
there	is	interest	from	at	least	two	or	more	SO/ACs	to	move	forward	and	
determining	that	a	CCWG	is	appropriate),	a	Drafting	Team	must	be	formed	to	
develop	a	draft	Charter	for	consideration	by	the	SO/ACs	who	have	expressed	an	
interest	to	participate	in	the	CCWG	as	Chartering	Organizations.	The	draft	
Charter	is	expected	to	establish	the	scope	of	work,	working	methods	(including	

	

3	

Comment [MW4]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

Deleted: is	not	generally	considered	a	vehicle	for	policy	
development	that	under	the	ICANN	Bylaws	is	the	role	of	a	
particular	SO

	

	

	

	

decision	making	methodology	and	the	definition	of	consensus)	and	Operating	
Principles	for	the	CCWG.	Ideally,	the	Drafting	Team	is	kept	small	to	ensure	focus	
and	should	contain	representatives	from	all	SO/ACs	that	have	expressed	an	
interest	in	participating	in	the	CCWG,	as	those	are	the	SO/ACs	that	will	need	to	
consider	and	ultimately	approve	the	CCWG	Charter.	Only	after	adoption	of	the	
Charter	by	at	least	two	or	more	SOs/ACs	is	the	CCWG	created	and	the	SOs/ACs	
who	adopted	the	Charter	deemed	to	be	its	Chartering	Organizations.	Each	SO/AC	
adopts	the	Charter	using	its	own	processes.	The	Charter	will	typically	also	
contain	information	on	participation,	e.g.	whether	the	CCWG	will,	in	addition	to	
members	appointed	by	Chartering	Organizations,	include	other	participants	who	
may	in	appropriate	cases	include	Board	and/or	staff	liaisons.	In	the	case	of	
members	appointed	by	the	Chartering	Organizations,	volunteers	are	requested	
and	appointed	according	to	the	rules	and	procedures	of	each	of	the	Chartering	
Organizations.	A	Chair(s)	may	be	assigned	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	if	so	
foreseen	by	the	Charter.	As	with	recent	CCWGs,	the	Charter	may	also	provide	
that	each	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	has	the	option	to	appoint	a	co-chair	to	
the	CCWG.		

Deleted: would	
Deleted: 	also

3. Operation	of	CCWG	–	The	CCWG	will	operate	in	conformity	with	the	Operating	
Principles	as	laid	out	in	its	Charter.	Following	the	formation	of	the	CCWG	and	
appointment	of	a	Chair(s),	one	of	the	first	steps	is	typically	to	develop	a	work	
plan	which	the	CCWG	will	subsequently	execute	to	produce	a	set	of	consensusbased	outputs.	This	work	plan	is	to	be	shared	with	the	Chartering	Organizations.	
The	CCWG	work	will	normally	involve	conducting	CCWG	meetings	(generally	via	
teleconference	or	using	other	online	tools),	drafting	reports,	producing	
deliverables	in	accordance	with	the	work	plan	and	publishing	these	for	public	
comment.	Furthermore,	the	CCWG	is	expected	to	provide	regular	updates	to	the	
Chartering	Organizations,	which	may	happen	via	the	Chartering	Organizationappointed	members	to	the	CCWG.	Regular	updates	and	open	meetings	are	
typically	also	held	during	ICANN	meetings.	Once	the	final		deliverables	are	
agreed	upon	by	the	CCWG	in	accordance	with	the	decision-making	process	as	
outlined	in	the	CCWG	Charter,	they	are	then	submitted	to	each	Chartering	
Organization	for	approval/adoption/support/non-objection	(as	appropriate).	
4. Decision	Making	by	a	CCWG	-	As	noted	elsewhere	in	this	framework,	the	
decision	making	methodology	(including	the	definition	and	designation	of	
“consensus”)	should	be	set	out	clearly	in	the	CCWG	Charter.	It	is	important	to	
note	that	voting	and	final	decisions	are	to	be	taken	by	appointed	members	(not	
observers	or	non-member	participants)	of	a	CCWG;	however,	CCWG	Chair(s)	
should	have	the	flexibility	and	authority	to	obtain	the	views	of	non-member	
participants	and	observers	in	the	process	of	reaching	consensus	on	particular	
positions	and	proposals.	

Comment [MW5]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	
Comment [MW6]: 	

4	

	
	

	

5. Adoption	of	Final	Report	by	Chartering	Organizations	and	Closure	of	CCWG	–	
The	Chartering	Organizations	will	review	the	outputs	from	the	CCWG	to	
determine	if	these	can	be	approved,	adopted,	supported	and/or	not	objected	to	
by	each	of	the	Chartering	Organizations,	in	accordance	with	their	own	rules	and	
processes.	Only	after	these	decisions	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	have	been	
made	can	further	steps	(e.g.	implementation,	submission	of	recommendations	
to	the	Board,	providing	CCWG	input	into	other	processes,	etc.)	be	taken.	The	
Charter	will	typically	note	that	the	Chartering	Organizations	will	agree	to	
formally	close	the	CCWG	once	the	final	CCWG	outputs	have	been	formally	
accepted	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	and	a	final	decision	as	to	any	action	
necessary	as	a	result	(e.g.	forwarding	to	the	Board,	move	to	implementation,	
etc.)	has	been	rendered.		
	
Alternative	1:	The	CCWG	may	close	once	the	Chartering	Organizations	have	
taken	a	final	decision	that	the	final	CCWG	output	cannot	be	approved/supported,	
with	the	co-chairs	of	the	CCWG	informed	accordingly.			
	
Alternative	2:	In	the	event	the	Chartering	Organizations	are	informed	by	the	
Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	that	the	CCWG	is	not	able	to	reach	a	consensus	position	on	
a	key	deliverable,	the	Chartering	Organizations	may	close	the	CCWG.	
	
6. Post-Closure	of	CCWG	–	The	recommendations	from	the	CCWG,	if	adopted,	will	
be	implemented	and	subsequently	monitored	against	the	success	criteria	
identified	previously	by	the	CCWG	(if	any).	In	developing	such	criteria	and	in	
finalizing	its	recommendations,	a	CCWG	is	strongly	encouraged	to	review	and,	if	
appropriate,	adopt	the	Policy	&	Implementation	Principles	that	were	developed	
by	the	GNSO	and	approved	by	the	ICANN	Board	in	2015,	to	the	extent	they	are	
applicable.	In	addition,	if	a	CCWG	believes	in	the	course	of	developing	its	
recommendations	that	it	will	be	necessary	for	the	CCWG	to	continue	to	be	
involved	in	the	implementation	phase,	this	need	and,	if	possible,	the	specific	role	
of	the	CCWG	in	implementation	should	be	spelled	out	in	the	CCWG’s	final	
output,	and	accepted	by	all	its	Chartering	Organizations.	

5	

Comment [MW7]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

	
	
	

	

	

6	

3.0	Detailed	Descriptions	of	the	CCWG	Life	Cycle	
3.1	Initiation	of	Cross	Community	Working	Group	(CCWG)	
	

	

1. Deciding	whether	or	not	a	CCWG	is	the	proper	mechanism	to	address	the	issue	
at	hand	is	the	first	and	most	important	decision	to	make	in	the	CCWG	life	cycle.	
The	formation	and	running	of	a	CCWG	requires	substantial	community	as	well	as	
staff	resources,	so	due	consideration	needs	to	be	given	to	whether	such	a	
mechanism	is	the	most	effective	and	efficient	means	to	achieve	the	desired	
outcome.	A	CCWG	should	not	be	a	substitute	for	existing	mechanisms	that	can	
be	used	to	address	the	problem(s)	identified,	including	processes	that	are	used	
for	policy	development	work.	A	CCWG	is	intended	to	inform	and	enhance	or	
supplement	policy	development	work,	and	may	precede	it,	but	does	not	replace	
it.		
	
Questions	to	consider	at	this	stage	include:	
o Is	the	issue	within	the	scope	of	policy	development	for	a	specific	SO	or	
specific	remit	of	an	SO/AC?	If	so,	it	is	unsuitable	for	a	CCWG	unless	the	
CCWG	is	specifically	intended	to	provide	input	to	the	applicable	SO/AC	
where	there	is	no	existing	mechanism	(e.g.	AC	advice,	public	comment	
forums)	for	such	input.	
o Does	the	issue	cut	across	different	SO/ACs?	
o Is	there	broad	community	interest	across	SO/ACs	to	engage	on	this	topic?	
o Is	it	likely	that	resolving	the	issue	through	a	CCWG	will	have	a	substantial	
budgetary	impact?	Are	there	sufficient	community	and	staff	resources	
available	to	form	and	support	a	CCWG?	
o What	is	the	expected	outcome?	Is	the	effort	expected	to	produce	
recommendations	that	are	intended	to	be	submitted	to	the	ICANN	Board	
for	action/consideration?		
o What	other	alternatives	are	available	to	address	the	issue?	
	
2. The	SOs	and	ACs	that	are	making	a	determination	of	whether	or	not	to	use	a	
CCWG	as	the	proper	vehicle	to	resolve	the	issue(s)	are	strongly	advised	to	
provide	answers	to	these	questions,	and	perhaps	others,	prior	to	deciding	to	
launch	the	process	of	forming	a	CCWG.		
	
3. To	allow	SO/ACs	to	properly	gauge	their	need	or	desire	to	participate	in	a	CCWG,	
it	is	strongly	advised	that	before	making	a	determination	to	initiate	a	CCWG	all	
relevant	parties	share	a	clear	understanding	of	the	issue(s)	at	hand,.	To	assist	in	
making	this	determination,	elements	that	may	be	considered	include	(but	are	
not	limited	to):	
o A	preliminary	definition	of	the	issue,	which	may	include:	 	
§ The	current,	or	previous,	situation	(i.e.,	status	quo)	
§ The	specific	circumstances	that	may	have	led	to	the	issue	at	hand	
7	

Comment [MW8]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

The	potential	consequences	arising	from	the	issue	if	not	
addressed	
§ Data	or	other	evidence	to	support	the	understanding	of	the	issue,	
if	applicable	
o A	preliminary	understanding	of	the	goals	and	objectives	of	the	CCWG.	
o A	preliminary	understanding	of	the	expected	scope	of	work	for	the	
potential	CCWG,	including	if	possible,	specific	questions	and	subjects	to	
be	considered.	
o A	preliminary	understanding	of	the	desired	outcome	(e.g.	
recommendations	to	the	ICANN	Board).	
The	interested	SO/ACs	may	request	a	staff	report	on	these	elements	at	this	
stage,	to	assist	with	community	understanding	and	discussion	of	the	need	for	a	
CCWG.		
§

	

3.2.	Formation	of	Cross	Community	Working	Group	(CCWG)	
	
1. After	at	least	two	SO/ACs	deem	that	a	CCWG	is	the	appropriate	mechanism	to	
address	the	identified	issue,	a	Drafting	Team	(DT)	is	formed	to	develop	a	draft	
Charter	to	address	the	topic.	Ideally,	the	DT	is	kept	small	to	ensure	focus,	and	
should	comprise	representatives	from	those	SO/ACs	that	have	expressed	an	
interest	in	participating	in	the	CCWG.	Those	representatives	are	expected	to	
consult	with	their	respective	organizations	on	a	regular	basis	to	ensure	that	the	
draft	Charter	meets	the	expectations	of	the	Chartering	Organizations.	
Alternatively	one	of	the	SO/ACs	may	develop	a	draft	Charter	to	be	used	as	a	
basis	for	discussion	with	other	SO/ACs	as	to	whether	there	is	interest	in	the	
formation	of	a	CCWG.	The	draft	Charter	may	then	be	adopted	or	used	by	the	DT	
to	serve	as	a	starting	point	for	the	final	Charter.	
	
2. The	Charter	is	a	critically	important	document	that	establishes	the	guiding	
principles	under	which	the	CCWG	will	operate	in	all	phases	of	its	life	cycle	in	
addressing	the	identified	issue.	A	lot	of	experience	has	been	gained	through	
recent	CCWG	efforts.	Based	on	that	experience,	elements	of	a	Charter	have	
surfaced	that	have	proven	their	worth	and	can	be	considered	to	be	stable	and		
standard	across	CCWGs.	As	such	it	is	strongly	advised	that	these	elements	be	
included	in	a	Charter.	These	elements	include	the	concepts	and	language	around	
the	CCWG	decision-making	methodologies	(internal	and	external)	and	
participation	in	a	CCWG.	However,	it	should	be	noted	that	other	elements,	such	
as	the	Problem	Statement,	Goals	&	Objectives	and	Scope,	will	have	to	be	
customized	to	meet	the	specifics	of	each	CCWG	effort.	A	template	for	a	CCWG	
charter	can	be	found	in	Annex	A	of	this	document.	Certain	key	elements	from	
the	Charter	template	text	should	be	used	and	included	in	the	draft	Charter	for	
future	CCWGs.	This	will	build	on	and	enhance	a	common	understanding	of	
CCWGs,	promote	consistency,	and	streamline	the	Charter	drafting	process,	
	

8	

Deleted: are	

	
3. Based	on	experience,	a	Charter	will	contain	a	number	of	sections,	which	are	
expected	to	guide	the	CCWG	through	its	life	cycle.	The	sections	are:	
	
I.
Section	I:	Cross	Community	Working	Group	Identification	–	This	section	
contains	administrative	details	regarding	the	CCWG,	including	
identification	of	the	Chartering	Organizations,	the	date(s)	they	approved	
the	Charter,	and	links	to	relevant	CCWG	resources.	
II.
Section	II:	Problem	Statement,	Goals	&	Objectives,	and	Scope	–	This	
section	focuses	on	describing	the	identified	issue	and	its	scope,	including	
if	feasible	what	is	considered	‘out	of	scope’.	In	defining	the	scope	of	a	
CCWG	it	is	strongly	recommended	that	questions	that	need	to	be	
considered	in	order	to	address	the	issue,	and	the	expected	outcomes	
from	the	effort,	be	included	expressly.	This	section	needs	to	be	
customized	for	each	CCWG	effort.	
III.
Section	III:	Deliverables	and	Reporting	–	This	section	contains	details	
related	to	the	anticipated	deliverables	of	the	CCWG	and	may	also	provide	
preliminary	timeline	estimates	for	their	delivery.	The	section	will	also	
contain	reporting	requirements	for	the	CCWG	(e.g.,	the	CCWG	Chair(s)	or	
appointed	members	of	the	CCWG	reporting	to	Chartering	Organizations).	
Where	it	is	expected	that	the	ICANN	Board	is	to	take	action	on	a	CCWG’s	
final	recommendations,	this	should	be	specified	in	the	Charter.		
IV.
Membership,	Staffing,	and	Organization	–	This	section	provides	
information	related	to	the	membership	structure	of	the	CCWG,	including	
definitions	of	the	various	CCWG	member	types,	if	applicable.	If	Board	
and/or	staff	liaisons	are	viewed	as	needed,	these	roles	should	be	
specified	in	the	Charter.	The	section	will	also	include	details	related	to	
ICANN	staff	support	and	expert	advisors,	if	applicable.	
V.
Rules	of	Engagement	–	This	section	provides	critical	information	related	
to	the	operational	rules	and	procedures	of	the	CCWG,	both	internally	and	
between	the	CCWG	and	its	Chartering	Organizations.	This	includes	
decision-making	methodologies,	problem	escalation	and	resolution,	
modification	of	the	Charter,	and	closure	of	the	CCWG.	See	also	the	next	
section	3.3.		
	
4. Once	the	drafting	of	the	Charter	is	completed	(see	section	3.2	above)	it	is	
submitted	to	all	participating	ICANN	SO/ACs	for	their	consideration.	Should	there	
be	any	concerns	regarding	the	Charter	or	proposed	changes	to	the	draft	Charter,	
these	should	be	communicated	to	the	DT	and	all	other	participating	SO/ACs	as	
soon	as	possible	so	that	the	concerns	or	changes	can	be	addressed	expeditiously,	
to	avoid	the	need	to	consider	the	draft	Charter	several	times.	Ideally,	any	major	
issues	/	concerns	ought	to	have	been	addressed	by	the	DT	as	a	result	of	regular	
communication	between	the	representatives	on	the	DT	and	their	respective	
organizations).	In	order	for	the	CCWG	to	be	formed,	the	same	identical	Charter	
	

9	

	

must	be	adopted	by	at	least	two	SO/ACs	who	will	become	the	CCWG	Chartering	
Organizations,	each	using	the	normal	adoption	process	for	that	organization.	If,	
as	part	of	the	adoption	process,	a	SO	or	AC	does	not	intend	to	become	a	CCWG	
Chartering	Organization	it	is	strongly	advised	that	the	organization	expressly	
indicates	this	intention	to	the	other	SO/ACs,	so	as	to	ensure	that	all	relevant	
SO/ACs	are	noted	as	having	considered	participation	in	the	CCWG.		
	
5. The	Charter	may	also	contain	information	on	modes	and	methods	of	
participation,	e.g.	whether	in	addition	to	members,	who	are	appointed	by	
Chartering	Organisations,	others	from	an	SO/AC	may	be	invited	as	“participants”	
(see	Section	IV:	Membership	Criteria	and	Section	IV:	Group	Formation,	
Dependencies,	and	Dissolution	from	the	charter	template	in	Annex	A	for	an	
illustrative	example);	and	any	additional	topics	which	are	agreed	by	the	
Chartering	Organizations	as	necessary	to	include	as	part	of	the	scope	of	work	for	
the	CCWG,	e.g.	the	need	to	identify	specific	items	for	which,	and	the	process	to	
be	followed	where,	additional	budget	or	staff	resources	are	required.	As	much	as	
possible,	a	CCWG	should	follow	the	usual	annual	budget	request	process	used	by	
ICANN,	in	consultation	with	ICANN	staff	and	(when	appropriate)	the	ICANN	
Board.	It	should	be	noted,	however,	that	the	expectation	is	that	most	CCWGs	will	
not	incur	or	need	additional	budget	or	staff	beyond	those	ordinarily	provided	to	
other	ICANN	working	groups	chartered	by	an	ICANN	Supporting	Organization	or	
Advisory	Committee.	

Comment [MW9]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

6. Volunteers	are	recruited	typically	through	the	launch	of	a	call	for	volunteers,	
which	is	to	be	as	widely	distributed	as	possible.	Volunteers	may,	depending	on	
the	Charter,	join	in	one	of	the	following,	different	roles:		
I.
Members.	Members	are	volunteers	who	are	appointed	by	a	Chartering	
Organization	according	to	the	rules	and	procedures	of	that	Chartering	
Organizations.	Reasonable	efforts	should	be	made	to	ensure	that	
individual	members:	
§
§
§
§

Have	sufficient	expertise	to	participate	in	the	CCWG	on	the	applicable	
subject;	
Commit	to	actively	participate	in	the	activities	of	the	CCWG	on	an	
ongoing	and	long-term	basis;	
Where	appropriate,	solicit	and	communicate	the	views	and	concerns	
of	individuals	in	the	organization	that	appoints	them;	and	
By	accepting	membership,	a	member	commits	to	abide	by	the	
Charter	when	participating	in	the	CCWG.		

Further,	each	Chartering	Organization	individually	and	in	consultation	with	the	
other	Chartering	Organizations	is	expected	to	take	reasonable	efforts	to	ensure	
that	the	final	membership	of	the	CCWG	is	sufficiently	diverse	to	the	extent	
feasible	(including	but	not	limited	to	geographical	region,	stakeholder	
	

Deleted: Board	or	staff	liaisons

10	

Deleted: e.g.	as

representation,	and	needed	skill	sets).	However,	care	should	be	taken	to	
maintain	an	appropriate	balance	in	each	CCWG	as	between	
diversity/representativeness	and	creating	a	CCWG	where	participation	is	so	
numerous	as	to	hamper	efficient	operations.		
Additional	requirements	may	be	included	in	the	Charter	with	respect	to	
members;	for	example,	members	may	be	required	to	report	to	their	Chartering	
Organizations	and	take	back	to	the	CCWG	views	from	their	Chartering	
Organizations.	

	
	

	

II.

Participants.	Participants	are	volunteers	from	the	community	who	are	
not	appointed	by	a	Chartering	Organizations	but	who	nonetheless	are	
able	to	actively	participate	in	and	attend	all	CCWG	meetings,	work	groups	
and	sub-work	groups.	However,	should	there	be	a	need	for	a	consensus	
call	or	decision,	such	consensus	call	or	decision	will	be	limited	to	CCWG	
members	appointed	by	the	Chartering	Organizations.	By	accepting	
participation,	a	participant	commits	to	abide	by	the	Charter	of	the	CCWG.		

III.

Observers.	Observers	are	subscribed	to	the	CCWG	mailing	list,	but	are	not	
able	to	post	to	the	list	or	join	meetings.		

IV.

Board/Staff	Liaisons.	The	need	for	these,	and	the	scope	of	their	roles	
(including	participation	in	the	CCWG	as	a	full	member),	should	be	
considered	during	the	Charter	drafting	phase	and	specified	in	the	
Charter.	
		
7. The	names	and	SO/AC	affiliation	(where	applicable)	of	all	volunteers	to	a	CCWG	
should	be	listed	and	publicly	accessible.	All	volunteers	participating	in	the	CCWG	
are	expected	to	submit	a	Statement	of	Interest	(SOI)	or	similar	statement,	
following	the	procedures	of	their	Chartering	Organization.	Such	a	statement	
should	at	a	minimum	include	the	name	of	the	participant,	the	SO	or	AC	of	
affiliation,	and	any	relevant	external	affiliation.	A	Chartering	Organization	may	
also	require	additional	information,	such	as	the	inclusion	of	particular	skills	or	
areas	of	specific	interest	in	relation	to	the	issues	to	be	addressed	by	the	CCWG,	
material	relationship	with	other	parties	affected	by	ICANN	and	primary	country	
of	residence.	
	
8. A	Chair(s)	will	be	either	appointed	by	the	CCWG	or,	as	in	recent	CCWGs,	each	of	
the	Chartering	Organizations	may	each	appoint	a	co-chair	to	the	CCWG.		

11	

	
3.3	Operation	of	Cross	Community	Working	Group	(CCWG)	or	Rules	of	
Engagement	
	

	

	

1. A	CCWG	is	expected	to	operate	in	accordance	with	its	Charter,	including	the	
Rules	of	Engagement	specified	therein.	Some	of	the	relevant	elements	from	the	
Charter	that	would	govern	this	phase	of	the	life	cycle	include:	
	
a. Process	for	amending	the	Charter	
b. Regular	reporting	requirements,	including	but	not	limited	to	the	general	
public	and	all	Chartering	Organizations	
c. Rules	and	procedures	for	handling	feedback	from	Chartering	
Organizations	
d. Rules	and	procedures	for	decision	making,	including	what	constitutes	
“consensus”	and,	if	appropriate,	establishing	approval	thresholds	as	well	
as:	
i. Handling	of	minority	positions,	and	
ii. Escalation	of	disputes	
e. Communication	methods	(e.g.,	email,	teleconferences,	face	to	face	
sessions)	
f. The	use	of	public	comment	periods	and	how	public	comments	received	
will	be	handled		
2. It	is	strongly	advised	that,	as	a	first	step,	the	CCWG	develops	its	own	internal	
principles	of	operation	that	will	guide	the	CCWG’s	intended	operations,	for	
example:	
• Rotate	meetings	from	a	timing	perspective	to	share	the	burden,	as	members	
and	participants	are	typically	located	in	different	time	zones	and	different	
geographic	regions.	
• Decisions	are	to	be	taken	only	after	two	readings	i.e.,	no	firm	decisions	are	
made	following	discussion	at	a	single	meeting.	At	a	minimum,	those	who	
were	not	present	at	the	meeting	should	be	offered	the	opportunity	to	
provide	input	for	review	and	consideration	at	the	next	meeting.		
• Members	are	expected	to	communicate	the	views	of	the	communities	that	
have	appointed	them	to	the	CCWG,	and	also	to	communicate	the	
information	and	deliberations	from	the	CCWG	back	to	their	respective	
communities.	
• Members	and	participants	are	expected	to	be	familiar	with	the	background	
material	and	documents	that	are	developed	during	the	course	of	the	CCWG	
work.	
• If	such	principles	of	operation	are	developed	by	the	CCWG,	they	should	be	
made	publicly	available.	
	
12	

Comment [MW10]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	

	

	

3. It	is	strongly	advised	that	a	CCWG	should	develop	a	work	plan	(including,	where	
feasible,	timelines	and	expected	outputs)	based	on	the	deliverables	outlined	in	
the	Charter,	for	the	purpose	of	informing	the	community	and	Chartering	
Organizations	of	progress	made	and	for	public	consultations.		
	
4. The	CCWG	will	subsequently	execute	its	work	plan	to	produce	its	set	of	
consensus-based	outputs.	To	deliver	its	output,	the	CCWG	will	typically	conduct	
CCWG	meetings,	draft	reports,	create	the	specified	deliverables,	and	publish	its	
draft	reports	for	public	comment.		
	
5. In	developing	its	output,	work	plan	and	any	reports,	the	CCWG	shall	seek	to	act	
by	consensus.	If	explicit	calls	for	consensus	are	made,	the	Chair(s)	should	always	
make	best	efforts	to	involve	all	members.	Unless	otherwise	agreed	and	specified	
in	the	Charter,	the	Chair(s)	shall	be	responsible	for	designating	each	position	as	
having	one	of	the	following	designations:	
	
a) Full	Consensus	-	a	position	where	no	minority	disagrees;	identified	by	an	
absence	of	objection	
b) Consensus	–	a	position	where	a	small	minority	disagrees,	but	most	agree	
		
In	the	absence	of	Full	Consensus,	the	Chair(s)	should	allow	for	the	submission	of	
minority	viewpoint(s)	and	these,	along	with	the	consensus	view,	shall	be	
included	in	the	relevant	CCWG	output.	
	
In	a	rare	case,	the	Chair(s)	may	decide	that	the	use	of	a	poll	is	reasonable	to	
assess	the	level	of	support	for	a	particular	proposal.	However,	care	should	be	
taken	in	using	polls	that	they	do	not	become	votes,	as	there	are	often	
disagreements	about	the	meanings	of	the	poll	questions	or	of	the	poll	results.	
	
In	the	event	the	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	have	to	designate	lack	of	consensus	(with	
consensus	in	the	sense	as	defined	above)	on	a	key	deliverable,	the	Chair(s)	will	
inform	the	Chartering	Organizations	accordingly.	The	Chartering	Organizations	
may	then	decide	to	close	the	CCWG	or	take	other,	mitigating	measures	to	enable	
the	CCWG	to	move	forward	with	its	work.		
6. It	is	expected	that	a	CCWG	will	produce	a	set	of	draft	consensus-based	outputs,	
which	except	in	extraordinary	circumstances	are	to	be	published	for	public	
comment.	It	is	recommended	that	a	CCWG’s	Charter	specifies	the	nature	of	the	
outputs	that	are	expected	to	the	extent	this	is	feasible.	The	Charter	should	also	
make	it	clear	whether	the	ICANN	Board	is	expected	to	act	on	a	CCWG’s	final	
recommendations,	in	which	case	the	CCWG’s	proposals	must	be	published	for	
public	comment.	Upon	the	close	of	a	public	comment	period,	a	CCWG	is	
expected	to	review	and	analyse	all	pubic	comments	received	and	publish	a	
summary	and	analysis	document.	Following	this	review	and	analysis	the	initial	
13	

Comment [MW11]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	–	
but	note	that	the	group’s	recent	discussions	indicate	
that	it	does	not	believe	the	current	formulation	needs	
to	change	or	be	further	added	to.	

	

outputs	may	need	to	be	revised	taking	into	account	the	relevant	public	
comments.	In	some	cases	more	than	one	round	of	public	comments	may	be	
necessary.	
	
7. The	CCWG	should	seek	to	produce	a	set	of	final	consensus-based	outputs,	which	
are	then	submitted	to	each	Chartering	Organization	for	
approval/adoption/support/non-objection.	See	Section	III:	Deliverables	and	
Section	III:	Decision-Making	Methodologies	from	the	charter	template	in	Annex	
A	for	further	context.	

3.4	Decision-Making	and	Closure	of	Cross	Community	Working	Group	(CCWG)	
		
[NOTE:	Additional	consideration	needs	to	be	given	to	the	role	of	
participants/observers/liaisons	vs	members	in	reaching	consensus]	
	
1. The	CCWG’s	outputs	are	to	be	sent	to	all	Chartering	Organizations	at	the	same	
time	for	their	review	and	deliberations.	Chartering	Organizations	may	seek	
additional	information	from	the	CCWG	if	necessary.	Each	Chartering	
Organization	will	review	the	outputs	from	the	CCWG	in	accordance	with	its	own	
rules	and	procedures	to	determine	whether	the	output	can	be	
approved/adopted/supported	or,	at	a	minimum,	not	objected	to,	whatever	is	
considered	to	be	most	appropriate	by	the	Chartering	Organization.	Unless	the	
CCWG’s	Charter	specifies	otherwise,	the	default	expectation	is	that	all	the	
Chartering	Organizations	will	at	a	minimum	not	object	to	the	CCWG	final	
deliverable.	However,	if	this	is	not	possible,	the	output	must	be	returned	to	the	
CCWG	for	possible	revision,	taking	into	account	input	from	all	the	Chartering	
Organizations.	The	resulting	decision	as	to	whether	to	make	any	changes	to	its	
initial	output	is	to	be	made	solely	by	the	CCWG.	The	amended	output	(if	any)	is	
to	be	sent	to	all	the	Chartering	Organizations	for	their	review	and	
approval/adoption/support/non-objection,	each	in	accordance	with	its	own	rules	
and	procedures.		
	
2. Unless	the	CCWG’s	Charter	provides	otherwise,	further	steps	(e.g.	
implementation,	submission	of	recommendations,	providing	input	into	other	
processes,	etc.),	if	proposed,	can	be	taken	only	after	adoption	of	the	outputs	by	
the	Chartering	Organizations	or	the	ICANN	Board,	as	appropriate.	The	Chartering	
Organizations	will	typically	agree	to	formally	close	the	CCWG	once	the	final	
CCWG	outputs	have	been	formally	accepted	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	and	
a	final	decision	as	to	any	action	necessary	as	a	result	(e.g.	forwarding	to	the	
Board,	move	to	implementation,	etc.)	has	been	rendered.		
	
Alternative	1	for	Closure:	The	CCWG	may	close	once	the	Chartering	Organizations	
have	taken	a	final	decision	that	the	final	CCWG	output	cannot	be	
	

14	

Comment [MW12]: FOR	DISCUSSION	IN	HELSINKI	–	
but	as	noted	above,	the	group	does	not	believe	the	
actual	definition	needs	improvement.	Discussion	
could	focus	here	on	the	role	of	Board	liaisons	in	
consensus	calls.	

approved/supported.	The	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	should	be	informed	accordingly.	
See	Section	V	–	Closure	&	Working	Group	Self	Assessment	from	the	charter	
template	in	Annex	A	for	further	context	related	to	closure.	
	
Alternative	2	for	Closure:	In	the	event	the	Chartering	Organizations	are	informed	
by	the	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	that	the	CCWG	is	not	able	to	reach	a	consensus	
position	on	a	key	deliverable,	the	Chartering	Organizations	may	close	the	CCWG	
(See	section	3.3	4	above).		
	

3.5.	Post-Closure	of	Cross	Community	Working	Group	(CCWG)	
	
Note:	The	implementation	and	post-implementation	phases	of	a	CCWG	are	the	ones	
with	the	least	amount	of	community	experience	to	draw	upon	for	lessons	learned.	As	a	
result,	the	section	below	is	presented	as	a	“straw	man"	proposal	for	community	
feedback.	It	is	based	on	the	mechanisms	currently	used	by	the	GNSO	for	policy	
development.		
	
1. If	there	are	recommendations	to	implement	from	the	final	CCWG	outputs,	an	
Implementation	Review	Team	(IRT)	will	be	formed	comprised,	at	minimum,	of	
ICANN	staff	and	volunteers	from	each	of	the	Chartering	Organizations.	
Recommendations	should	be	implemented	collaboratively	and	iteratively	to	
ensure	that	the	implementation	matches	the	CCWG’s	intent.	Except	in	
extraordinary	circumstances,	the	proposed	implementation	plan	should	be	
published	for	public	comment.	
	
2. The	IRT	should	establish	baseline	data	and	metrics	for	post-implementation	
measurement	against	identified	success	criteria	(ideally,	these	criteria	should	
have	been	defined	by	the	CCWG),	if	such	data	and	metrics	have	not	previously	
been	generated	by	the	CCWG.	
	
3. The	adopted	CCWG	recommendations	will	be	implemented	and	subsequently	
monitored	against	the	success	criteria	(identified	previously).	
	
4. Once	baseline	data	and	metrics	are	captured	and	recommendations	are	
implemented,	the	implementation	should	be	evaluated	after	a	reasonable	
amount	of	time	to	determine	if	the	recommendations	have	met	the	relevant	
success	criteria.	Further	actions	may	be	identified	as	needed,	if	the	results	
significantly	miss	the	definitions	of	success.	
	
In	developing	success	criteria	(if	any)	for	implementation	and	in	finalizing	its	
recommendations,	a	CCWG	is	strongly	encouraged	to	review	and,	if	appropriate,	adopt	
the	Policy	&	Implementation	Principles	that	were	developed	by	the	GNSO	and	approved	
by	the	ICANN	Board	in	2015,	to	the	extent	they	are	applicable.	In	addition,	if	a	CCWG	
	

15	

Comment [MW13]: FOR	FURTHER	DISCUSSION	IN	
HELSINKI	

believes	in	the	course	of	developing	its	recommendations	that	it	will	be	necessary	for	
the	CCWG	to	continue	to	be	involved	in	the	implementation	phase,	this	need	and,	if	
possible,	the	specific	role	of	the	CCWG	in	implementation	should	be	spelled	out	in	the	
CCWG’s	final	output,	and	accepted	by	all	its	Chartering	Organizations.	
	
Because	of	the	potential	resource	impact	(on	community	and	staff)	of	keeping	a	CCWG	
in	operation	following	formal	acceptance	of	its	final	recommendations,	in	cases	where	
the	Chartering	Organizations	support	such	a	continuation,	in	accepting	a	
recommendation	that	a	CCWG	continues	to	remain	open	for	and	during	
implementation,	the	Chartering	Organizations	should	also	specify	(as	far	as	is	feasible)	a	
timeline	and	task	list	for	the	CCWG	during	the	implementation	phase.	
	
	

	

16	

4.0	Conclusions	
	
CCWGs	are	a	relatively	new	phenomenon	within	the	ICANN	community,	but	they	are	
becoming	a	mechanism	that	is	being	utilized	more	and	more	frequently	to	resolve	issues	
of	mutual	interest	to	ICANN’s	Supporting	Organizations	and	Advisory	Committees.	To	
date,	there	have	been	no	formalized	processes	or	procedures	established	to	govern	the	
operations	of	CCWGs,	and	while	this	Framework	is	intended	to	provide	guidance,	it	is	
not	intended	to	be	prescriptive.	It	is	intended	to	function	as	a	living	document,	to	be	
improved	as	lessons	continue	to	be	learned.	To	that	end,	it	is	recommended	that	the	
principles	and	recommendations	contained	in	this	Framework	should	be	reviewed	either	
three	(3)	years	after	its	adoption	by	the	community,	or	after	three	CCWGs	have	
completed	their	work,	whichever	first	occurs.	
	
In	the	Draft	Framework	that	was	published	for	public	comment	in	February	2016,	
several	open	questions	were	identified	for	which	community	input	was	sought.	The	
following	are	the	non-exhaustive	list	of	open	questions:	
	
• Should	there	be	a	requirement	that	all	CCWG	recommendations	must	be	
considered	by	the	ICANN	Board,	if	minimum	requirements	are	met	(similar	to	
the	GNSO	Policy	Development	Process?	
o CCWG	response:	This	should	be	discussed	and	determined	during	the	
Charter	drafting	phase.	If	the	anticipated	outputs	will:	(i)	impact	SO	policy	
development	processes;	(ii)	require	implementation	by	ICANN	(e.g.	
similar	in	scope	to	implementation	of	a	GNSO	policy);	(iii)	result	in	
possible	Bylaw	changes);	or	(iv)	otherwise	trigger	action	by	the	Board,	the	
Charter	and	the	CCWG’s	Final	Report	should	make	clear	that	the	final	
recommendations	will	require	Board	consideration.	In	these	cases,	
additional	considerations	such	as	the	need	for	and	nature	of	Board	
involvement	in	the	CCWG	will	also	need	to	be	discussed	prior	to	
chartering	the	CCWG.	As	noted	above,	a	CCWG	is	not	the	proper	vehicle	
for	policy	development	work	and	does	not	replace	the	policy	
development	process.		
• Should	more	formalized	Operating	Procedures	be	developed	for	CCWGs?	
o CCWG	response:	It	should	be	up	to	each	DT	and	the	Chartering	
Organizations	for	a	new	CCWG	to	determine	whether	new	or	more	
formal	procedures	in	addition	to	the	principles	outlined	in	this	
Framework	are	necessary.	During	the	recommended	3-year	review	cycle	
of	this	Framework,	any	such	additional	procedures	that	may	have	been	
adopted	by	new	CCWGs	can	be	considered	for	inclusion	in	an	updated	
Framework.	
• Should	additional	mechanisms	be	developed	to	deal	with	situations	in	which	
Chartering	Organizations	may	disagree	or	want	to	discontinue	their	
engagement?		

	

17	

Comment [MW14]: This	section	will	be	rewritten	in	
the	Final	Framework,	to	incorporate	the	final	resolution	
of	each	question	into	the	main	text.	

•

•

•

•

•

•

	

	

	

o CCWG	response:	Unless	further	community	discussion	at	ICANN56	shows	
community	agreement	otherwise,	the	CCWG	believes	that	it	should	be	up	
to	each	DT	and	the	Chartering	Organizations	for	a	new	CCWG	to	specify	
any	criteria	or	conditions	that	would	apply	to	this	situation.	
Should	there	be	a	mechanism	to	close	a	CCWG	if	it	is	clear	that	it	will	not	be	
possible	to	produce	a	final	report	or	that	circumstances	have	overtaken	the	need	
for	a	CCWG?	(See	Section	3.3.4	and	3.4.2	above)	
o CCWG	response:	Either	Alternative	1	or	2	as	described	in	Section	3.4.2	
should	be	adopted.	In	cases	where	a	Chartering	Organization	believes	
that	circumstances	have	overtaken	the	need	to	continue	with	a	CCWG,	it	
should	notify	the	other	Chartering	Organizations	to	begin	a	discussion	
over	closing	the	CCWG.	
For	implementation	and	post-implementation	of	the	CCWG	output,	what	should	
be	the	role	of	the	CCWG?	Should	the	Charter	template	be	expanded	to	include	
these	details?	How	would	the	process	be	initiated?	
o The	CCWG	will	be	seeking	further	community	input	on	this	at	ICANN56,	
and	will	update	its	response	and	resolution	of	this	question	after	the	
meeting.	
As	the	appointment	mechanism	for	members	varies	across	SO/ACs,	how	can	
CCWG	leadership	and	support	staff	be	kept	informed	of	appointments	and	
changes?	
o CCWG	response:	This	should	be	part	of	the	reporting	requirement	in	a	
CCWG’s	Charter.	
Are	uniform	Statements	of	Interest,	or	something	similar,	beneficial	to	the	CCWG	
process?	(See	section	3.2.7	above)	
o CCWG	response:	At	minimum,	CCWG	participants	should	provide	a	
statement	listing	their	SO/AC	affiliation	(if	participating	as	members)	and	
relevant	expertise,	skills	and	interest	in	the	subject	matter.	More	broadly,	
a	CCWG	should	consider	including	accountability	mechanisms	such	as	
verification	of	participation	statements	where	feasible.	
Should	specific	requirements	be	listed	for	the	appointment	of	members?	
o CCWG	response:	This	should	be	determined	by	each	DT	and	the	
Chartering	Organizations	for	a	new	CCWG.	However,	the	CCWG’s	
recommendations	relating	to	diversity	of	membership	should	be	
considered	in	every	CCWG.	
Who	launches	a	call	for	volunteers/participants?		
o CCWG	response:	Unless	a	DT	and	the	Chartering	Organizations	for	a	new	
CCWG	have	determined	otherwise,	this	should	ordinarily	be	done	by	the	
Chartering	Organizations	and	ICANN.	
	

	

18	

Annex	A:	Draft	CCWG	Charter	Template	
	
	
	
	
	
	

Cross	Community	Working	
Group	(CCWG)	Charter	
Template	
	
	
	

WG	Name:	

Cross	Community	Working	Group	on…	

Section	I:		Cross	Community	Working	Group	Identification	
Chartering	
Organization(s):	
Charter	Approval	Date:	
Name	of	CCWG	
Chair(s):	
CCWG	Workspace	URL:	
CCWG	Mailing	List:	

	
	
	
	
	

Resolution	adopting	the	 Title:	
charter:	
Ref	#	&	Link:	
Important	Document	
• 	
Links:		
	

	
	

Section	II:		Problem	Statement,	Goals	&	Objectives,	and	Scope	
Problem	Statement:	
	
[This	section	should	clearly	articulate	the	problem	that	requires	resolution.	Some	elements	that	
could	be	considered	include:	
	
• The	current,	or	previous,	situation	
• The	circumstances	the	may	have	led	to	change,	or	the	problem	
• The	potential	consequences	of	the	problem	
	
	

19	

Note:	Data	or	other	evidence	to	support	the	problem,	if	applicable,	should	be	encouraged]	
	
Goals	&	Objectives:	
	
[This	section	should	outline	the	anticipated	goals	from	the	CCWG	effort,	as	well	as	specific	
objectives	that	may	help	achieve	those	goals.]	
	
Scope:	
	
[This	section	should	define	the	work	that	the	CCWG	will	undertake.	Specific	questions	and	topics	
expected	to	be	considered	by	the	CCWG	should	be	identified	here.	If	there	are	inter-related	efforts	
that	may	have	an	impact	on	the	work	of	the	CCWG,	or	vice	versa,	they	should	be	noted.	
	
To	the	extent	possible,	elements	that	are	defined	as	out	of	scope	should	be	identified	as	well.]	
	

Section	III:		Deliverables	and	Reporting	
Deliverables:	
	
[This	section	should	list	and	define	the	deliverables	that	the	CCWG	anticipates	producing.	As	one	of	
the	first	steps	of	most	Working	Groups	is	generally	to	create	a	work	plan,	however,	it	may	be	
impractical	to	include	extensive	detail	at	the	time	of	chartering.	Any	data	or	metrics	expected	to	be	
created	or	relied	upon	by	the	CCWG	should	also	be	noted	here,	as	far	as	practicable.]		
	
Reporting:	
	
The	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	will	brief	the	Chartering	Organizations	on	a	regular	basis.	
	

Section	IV:		Membership,	Staffing,	and	Organization	
Membership	Criteria:	
	

Membership	in	the	CCWG,	and	its	sub-working	groups	should	these	be	created,	is	open	to	Members,	
Participants,	and	others.	Members	are	appointed	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	in	accordance	with	
their	own	rules	and	procedures.	Each	Chartering	Organization	shall	appoint	a	minimum	of	[optional:	
2]	and	a	maximum	of	[optional:	5]	Members.	Chartering	Organizations	should	make	reasonable	
efforts	that	individual	Members:	
•
•
•

	

Have	sufficient	expertise	to	participate	in	the	CCWG	on	the	applicable	subject	matter;	
Commit	to	actively	participate	in	the	activities	of	the	CCWG	on	an	on-going	and	long-term	basis;	
Where	appropriate,	solicit	and	communicate	the	views	and	concerns	of	individuals	in	the	
organization	that	appoints	them;	and	

20	

•

Commit	to	abide	to	the	Charter	when	participating	in	the	CCWG.		

Chartering	Organizations	are	encouraged	to	use	open	and	inclusive	processes	when	selecting	their	
members	for	a	CCWG,	and	reasonable	efforts	should	be	made	each	of	ICANN’s	five	geographic	
regions	is	represented.	
[Optional]	In	the	event	the	CCWG	decides	to	create	sub-working	groups,	it	is	strongly	advised	that	
individual	members	participate	in	only	one	sub-working	group	in	order	to	minimize	the	workload	for	
individual	members	and	to	facilitate	scheduling	meetings.	
[Optional]	In	addition,	the	CCWG	will	be	open	to	any	interested	person	as	a	Participant.	Participants	
may	be	from	a	Chartering	Organization,	from	a	stakeholder	group	not	represented	in	the	CCWG,	or	
may	be	self-appointed.	Participants	will	be	able	to	actively	participate	in	and	attend	all	CCWG	
meetings,	work	groups	and	sub-work	groups.	However,	should	there	be	a	need	for	a	consensus	call	or	
decision,	such	consensus	call	or	decision	will	be	limited	to	CCWG	members	appointed	by	the	
Chartering	Organizations.	A	Participant	commits	to	abide	by	the	Charter	of	the	CCWG.		
All	Members	and	Participants	will	be	listed	on	the	CCWG’s	Wiki	[add	link	if	available].	The	mailing	list	
of	the	CCWG	will	be	publicly	archived	[add	link	if	available].		
[If	applicable	-	All	members	and	participants	in	this	process	are	required	to	submit	a	Statement	of	
Interest	(SOI)	following	the	procedures	of	their	Chartering	Organization	or	an	equivalent	statement.	
Such	a	statement	should	at	a	minimum	include	the	name	of	the	participant,	the	SO	or	AC	of	affiliation,	
and	any	external	affiliation.		
Volunteer	Chair(s)	will	guide	CCWG	deliberations	and	ensure	that	the	process	is	bottom-up,	
consensus-based	and	has	balanced	multistakeholder	participation.		
Appointment	of	chair(s):	
Alternative	1.	The	chair(s)	shall	be	appointed	by	the	Chartering	organizations,	should	a	
Chartering	Organization	decide	to	appoint	a	co-chair	to	the	CCWG.	
	
Alternative	2.	The	CCWG	will	nominate	and	appoint	chair(s)	from	among	its	Members.	
	
[Optional]	The	CCWG	may	include	other	persons	in	addition	to	Members	and	Participants.	For	
example,	this	could	include	a	liaison	from	the	ICANN	Board,	bringing	the	voice	of	the	Board	and	Board	
experience	to	CCWG	activities	and	deliberations,	who	is	able	to	participate	in	the	effort	in	the	same	
manner	as	other	Participants	of	the	CCWG.	A	CCWG	may	also	include	an	ICANN	staff	representative	to	
provide	input	into	the	deliberations	and	who	is	able	to	participate	in	the	effort	in	the	same	manner	as	
other	Participants	of	the	CCWG.		
	

Group	Formation,	Dependencies,	and	Dissolution:	

	

21	

[Optional]	Include	a	list	of	dependencies	and	special	circumstances	that	would	result	in	ending	the	
effort	and	closure	of	the	CCWG.	
	

Expert	Advisors:	
	
[If	expert	Advisors	are	expected	to	be	needed,	guidelines	for	their	involvement	should	be	included	
here.	For	instance,	the	following	elements	may	be	considered:	
•
•

Define	the	expertise	needed,	anticipated	cost,	selection	process/methodology,	and	allotted	
budget.	
The	role	of	Advisors	–	for	instance,	they	may	or	may	not	be	expected	to	contribute	to	the	
dialogue	similar	to	other	CCWG	Participants,	though	if	there	is	a	need	for	any	consensus	call(s),	
the	Advisors	would	not	participate	in	such	a	call.]	

	
Staffing	&	Resources:	
	
ICANN	will	provide	sufficient	staff	support	to	support	the	activities	of	the	CCWG.	The	ICANN	staff	
assigned	to	the	CCWG	will	fully	support	the	work	of	the	CCWG	as	requested	by	the	Chair(s),	including	
providing	meeting	support,	document	drafting,	editing	and	distribution	as	well	as	making	substantive	
contributions.	ICANN	staff,	in	a	coordinated	effort	with	the	CCWG,	will	facilitate	outreach	to	ensure	
that	the	global	multistakeholder	community	is	aware	of	and	able	as	much	as	possible	to	participate	in	
the	work	of	the	CCWG.	
To	the	extent	possible,	any	additional	resources	(beyond	the	assigned	ICANN	staff)	that	may	be	
needed	should	be	identified	at	the	earliest	opportunity,	to	ensure	that	such	resources	can	be	
obtained	and	planned	for.	
	

Section	V:	Rules	of	Engagement	
Decision-Making	Methodologies:	
CCWG	(internal)	Decision-Making	
In	developing	its	output,	work	plan	and	any	reports,	the	CCWG	shall	seek	to	act	by	consensus.	The	
Chair(s)	may	make	a	call	for	Consensus.	In	making	such	a	call,	a	Chair(s)	should	always	make	
reasonable	efforts	to	involve	at	a	minimum	all	Members	of	the	CCWG	(or	sub-working	groups,	if	
applicable).	The	Chair(s)	shall	be	responsible	for	designating	each	position	as	having	one	of	the	
following	designations:	
a) Full	Consensus	-	a	position	where	no	minority	disagrees;	identified	by	an	absence	of	objection	
	

	

22	

b) Consensus	–	a	position	where	a	small	minority	disagrees,	but	most	agree	
In	the	absence	of	Full	Consensus,	the	Chair(s)	should	allow	for	the	submission	of	minority	viewpoint(s)	
and	these,	along	with	the	consensus	view,	shall	be	included	in	the	report	or	relevant	deliverable.	
In	a	rare	case,	the	Chair(s)	may	decide	that	the	use	of	a	poll	is	reasonable	to	assess	the	level	of	
support	for	a	recommendation.	However,	care	should	be	taken	in	using	polls:	they	should	not	become	
votes,	as	there	are	often	disagreements	about	the	meanings	of	the	poll	questions	or	of	the	poll	
results.	
Any	Member	[or	Participant]	who	disagrees	with	the	consensus-level	designation	made	by	the	
Chair(s),	or	believes	that	his/her	contributions	are	being	systematically	ignored	or	discounted,	should	
first	discuss	the	circumstances	with	the	Chair(s).	In	the	event	that	the	matter	cannot	be	resolved	
satisfactorily,	the	Member	[or	Participant]	should	request	an	opportunity	to	discuss	the	situation	with	
the	Chairs	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	or	their	designated	representatives.		
	
[This	section	of	the	charter	may	include	contemplation	of	the	role	of	Supporting	Organizations	and	
Advisory	Committees	and	if	applicable,	their	review	and	approval	of	draft	proposals,	including	how	
to	resolve	circumstances	where	there	is	not	unanimous	support	for	all	recommendations.	For	
instance,	see	below.]	
	
[Optional]	As	a	first	work	item	the	CCWG	shall	develop	principles	of	operation	that	will	guide	how	the	
CCWG	intends	to	conduct	its	business.	These	principles	of	operations	will	be	made	publicly	available.		
In	the	event	that	no	consensus	is	reached	by	the	CCWG,	the	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	will	submit	a	
Chair(s)’	Report	to	the	Chartering	Organizations.	In	this	Report	the	Chair(s)	shall	document	the	issues	
that	are	considered	contentious,	the	process	that	was	followed	and	any	suggestions	to	mitigate	those	
issues	that	may	be	affecting	consensus-building.	If,	after	implementation	of	the	mitigating	measures,	
consensus	can	still	not	be	reached	the	Chair(s)	shall	prepare	a	Final	Chair(s)’	Report	documenting	the	
processes	that	were	followed	to	reach	consensus.	The	Chair(s)	may	request	that	the	Chartering	
Organizations	provide	recommendations	on	additional	means	for	mitigating	the	issues	that	are	
preventing	consensus.	
External	Decision	-	Making	
Decision	Making	by	the	Chartering	Organizations	on	the	CCWG’s	[Final]	Output	
Following	the	submission	of	the	[final]	CCWG	output,	each	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	shall,	in	
accordance	with	their	own	rules	and	procedures,	review	and	discuss	the	output	and	decide	whether	
to	adopt	the	proposals	and	the	recommendations	contained	within.	The	Chairs	of	the	Chartering	
Organizations	shall	notify	the	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	of	the	result	of	their	deliberations	as	soon	as	
feasible.	
Supplemental	Final	Output	
In	the	event	that	one	or	more	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	object	to	one	or	more	of	the	
recommendations	contained	in	the	[final]	output,	the	Chairs	of	the	CCWG	shall	be	notified	
accordingly.	This	notification	shall	include	at	a	minimum	the	reasons	for	the	objection	and	a	
	

23	

suggested	alternative	that	would	be	acceptable,	if	any.	The	CCWG	may,	at	its	discretion,	reconsider	its	
recommendations,	post	them	for	public	comments,	and/or	develop	and	submit	to	the	Chartering	
Organizations	a	Supplemental	Final	Proposal,	which	takes	into	account	the	concerns	that	have	been	
raised.	
Following	submission	of	the	Supplemental	Final	Proposal,	the	Chartering	Organizations	shall	discuss	
and	decide	(each	in	accordance	with	its	own	rules	and	procedures)	whether	to	adopt	the	
recommendations	contained	in	the	Supplemental	Final	Proposal.	The	Chairs	of	the	Chartering	
Organizations	shall	notify	the	Chairs	of	the	CCWG	of	the	result	of	these	deliberations	as	soon	as	
feasible.	
	
	
[This	section	may	also	include	a	description	of	the	role	the	ICANN	Board	may	play	in	decisionmaking.	For	instance,	see	below.]	
	
Submission	of	a	Board	Report	
After	receiving	the	relevant	notifications	from	all	Chartering	Organizations	as	described	above,	the	
Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	shall,	within	a	reasonable	time	after	receiving	the	last	notification,	submit	to	the	
Chair	of	the	ICANN	Board	of	Directors	and	the	Chairs	of	all	the	Chartering	Organizations	the	CCWG-	
Board	Report,	which	shall	include	at	a	minimum:	
a) The	(supplemental)	final	output	as	adopted	by	the	CCWG;	
b) The	notifications	of	the	decisions	from	the	Chartering	Organizations;	and	
c) Documentation	of	the	process	that	was	followed,	including	but	not	limited	to	documenting	the	
process	of	building	consensus	within	the	CCWG	and	any	public	consultations	that	were	held.	
In	the	event	one	or	more	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	do(es)	not	support	(parts	of)	the	
(supplemental)	final	output,	the	Board	Report	shall	clearly	indicate	which	part(s)	of	the	
(supplemental)	final	output	are	fully	supported	and	the	parts	that	are	not,	as	well	as	which	of	the	
Chartering	Organizations	dissents,	to	the	extent	this	is	feasible.			
[Note:	The	CCWG-Accountability	ICANN	Board	decision-making	process	was	defined	in	a	board	
resolution,	which	may	serve	as	a	model	for	how	future	processes	can	be	defined:	
https://www.icann.org/resources/board-material/resolutions-2014-10-16-en#2.d]	
	
	

	

24	

Modification	of	the	Charter:	
In	the	event	this	charter	does	not	provide	sufficient	guidance	and/or	the	impact	of	the	Charter	is	
found	to	be	unreasonable	for	conducting	the	business	of	the	CCWG,	the	Chair(s)	have	the	authority	to	
determine	the	proper	actions	to	be	taken.		Such	action	may,	for	example,	consist	of	a	modification	to	
the	Charter	in	order	to	address	the	omission	or	its	unreasonable	impact,	in	which	case	the	Chair(s)	
may	propose	such	modification	to	the	Chartering	Organizations.	A	modification	shall	only	be	effective	
after	adoption	of	the	amended	Charter	by	all	Chartering	Organizations,	in	accordance	with	their	own	
rules	and	procedures,	and	publication	of	the	amended	Charter.	
	
Problem/Issue	Escalation	&	Resolution	Process:	
Members	and	Participants	of	the	CCWG	are	expected	to	abide	by	the	ICANN	Expected	Standards	of	
Behavior.	
If	a	Member	[or	Participant]	feels	that	these	standards	are	being	abused,	the	affected	party	should	
appeal	first	to	the	Chair(s)	of	the	CCWG	and,	if	unsatisfactorily	resolved,	to	the	Chair(s)	of	the	
Chartering	Organizations	or	their	designated	representative.	It	is	important	to	emphasize	that	
expressed	disagreement	is	not,	by	itself,	grounds	for	abusive	behavior.	It	should	also	be	taken	into	
account	that,	as	a	result	of	cultural	differences	and	language	barriers,	statements	may	appear	
disrespectful	or	inappropriate	to	some	but	may	not	have	been	necessarily	intended	as	such.	However,	
it	is	expected	that	CCWG	participants	will	make	every	effort	to	respect	the	principles	outlined	in	
ICANN’s	Expected	Standards	of	Behavior	as	referenced	above.		
	
The	Chair(s)	are	empowered	to	restrict	the	participation	of	someone	who	seriously	disrupts	the	
group.	Generally,	the	participant	should	first	be	warned	privately	and	then	warned	publicly	before	
such	a	restriction	is	put	into	place;	in	extreme	circumstances,	this	requirement	may	be	bypassed.	This	
restriction	is	subject	to	the	right	of	appeal	as	outlined	below.	Any	CCWG	Member	or	Participant	who	
believes	that	his/her	contributions	are	being	systematically	ignored	or	discounted,	or	who	wishes	to	
appeal	a	decision	of	the	CCWG,	should	first	discuss	the	circumstances	with	the	CCWG	Chair(s).	In	the	
event	that	the	matter	cannot	be	resolved	satisfactorily,	the	affected	party	should	request	an	
opportunity	to	discuss	the	situation	with	the	Chair(s)	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	or	their	
designated	representatives.	In	addition,	if	any	CCWG	Member	or	Participant	is	of	the	opinion	that	
someone	is	not	performing	their	role	according	to	the	criteria	outlined	in	this	Charter,	the	same	
appeals	process	may	be	invoked.	
		
Closure	&	Working	Group	Self-Assessment:	
	
The	CCWG	will	consult	with	their	Chartering	Organizations	to	determine	when	it	can	consider	its	work	
completed.	The	CCWG	and	all	sub-working	groups	shall	be	dissolved	upon	receipt	of	notification	from	
the	Chair(s)	of	the	Chartering	Organizations	or	their	designated	representatives.	
	

	

25	

Implementation	
	
[This	section	of	the	charter	should	consider	the	role	of	the	CCWG	in	implementation,	as	well	as	a	
possible	post-implementation	role	to	analyse	the	effectiveness	of	implemented	recommendations.]	
	

Section	VI:	Charter	Document	History	
Version	

Date	
	

Description	
	

1.0	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
Staff	Contact:	
	
Email:	 	
	
Translations:	If	translations	will	be	provided	please	indicate	the	languages	below:	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	 	 	
	
	
	
	
	
	

	

	

26	

	

