HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 17:00 to 18:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

MARY WONG:

Hello, everyone. We're about to begin this session. And so if we
could have the recording started and invite everyone to take
your seats.
So we're now in session. Welcome, everybody, to this
community dialogue on developing a final framework of uniform
principles for the formation and the operations for crosscommunity working groups, which are increasingly being relied
upon by the ICANN community. And there, of course, may be at
least one being formed in the very near future.
My name is Mary Wong, and I'm a member of ICANN staff
together with my colleague Steve Chan and another colleague,
Bart Boswinkel, who if he stands up will be unmistakable. We
support the efforts of this working group.
Without any further ado, I'm just going to introduce you to and
hand things over to the two co-chairs of this working group, one
from the ccNSO, Becky Burr, and the other from the GNSO, John
Berard.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

Becky?

BECKY BURR:

Thanks. And thanks, everybody, for attending.
I have one contribution to this. It occurs to me that we have no
number to associate with this. So in CCWG accountability calls,
we say call number 754. We have no numbers associated with
this.
And I'm going to propose that the hallmark of a CCWG and
something entirely other is the fact that you do not feel
compelled to associate numbers with the number of calls you
have.
And now I'm going to turn it over for the serious and hard work
to John Berard.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you, Becky. My name is John Berard, and I was appointed
co-chair of this working group by the GNSO.
In light of how much attention cross-community working groups
and that label has gotten inside and around the community, I
thought it would be useful to talk a bit about how we got here
because we have been at this for a bit.

In fact, our work

predates the explosion of cross-community working groups.

Page 2 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

It goes back to 2009 when the joint IDN working group was
empowered and then 2011 when the joint applicant support
working group was impaneled. And then in 2012, when the
GNSO realized that the JIG had been successfully impaneled but
the JAS had not been, there was a suggestion that we take a look
at why and how cross-community working groups could be
made more effective.
So in 2012, the GNSO on its own impaneled a working group to
begin to examine principles of cross-community working group
operation. That led nowhere because we had done it alone.
And so in 2013, we invited and were able to bring aboard the
ccNSO as partner and co-chair for a working group that was
impaneled in 2014.
And 2014, of course, was the year in which the expansion of
cross-community working groups began in earnest. One, in fact,
begun by the then-CEO making a suggestion from the stage that
anybody interested should meet in the back of the room.
And so it was -- it's on that platform that we began our
deliberations. And that led us to a set of principles, a draft set of
principles, that were issued in February which many people have
responded to. In fact, it was well- -- well-read and responded to.

Page 3 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

In short, we proposed to look at cross-community working
groups not as a static entity but as a dynamic organism and
looked at it through the lens of its life cycle. And if you were to
review the documents, you would see that we talk about the
ability or how to initiate a cross-community working group, how
to form one, the rules that could surround its operation, its
ability and method for setting and making recommendation, the
adoption of its conclusions, and then even creating an
opportunity for there to be post-implementation activity by the
cross-community working group so as to provide aid and
comfort to the SOs and ACs that have participated as they begin
to implement.
We are here today to talk a bit about the feedback we got from
the public comment period. There were, as you can see on the
screen, four key elements and a fifth, if we have time we can get
to. But the four that we heard the most interest in and got
questions about were diversity in a cross-community working
group, budgeting and resource allocation for that crosscommunity working group, the definition of "consensus" in a
cross-community working group, and then, of course, the role of
that team in implementation.
And so we are scheduled for another hour and 15 minutes. And
if we divide that by four, we get sort of 20 minutes per subject.
And so I would like to dive right into it and begin to take

Page 4 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

comment, criticism, input, or guidance from the folks here
assembled on each of those subjects so that we can deliver on
the promise that we have made to ourselves that we will have
completed our work by the time we next meet in India.
I was reminded of a very poetic way that a federal judge once
described the time line of a case. He said that he hoped that we
would have a decision by the time the song of the turtle is heard
in the Bronx. And I thought, well, that's poetic. We missed that
deadline. I hope we don't miss this deadline.
So, Becky, you want to jump in?

BECKY BURR:

Yeah, just as you are all beginning to think about the comments
that you have on the topics that we raised, diversity, budgeting,
implementation --

JOHN BERARD:

Implementation.

BECKY BURR:

Oh, put that -- and consensus -- okay, now go back to the other
slide -- just to make sure you understand where we are, we have
received comments on this. What we want to do is discuss those
comments so that we can wrap up, provide a final report, and

Page 5 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

send it back to the chartering organizations which in this case
are the GNSO and the ccNSO.
So -- and just let me start by saying we did talk about diversity
and about the importance of diversity with respect to many of
the issues that we were talking about, including the
accountability provision. And the draft framework here doesn't
contain a specific recommendation.
important."

It says, "Diversity is

And we heard a lot from commenters saying

essentially that's nice but you need more. It's more than just
important. You should have more than just a kind of passing
reference to it. And so we propose to add a recommendation
that the -- as the charter is being drafted and members are being
appointed, the chartering organizations should consult with one
another to ensure that there is diversity of representation to the
extent feasible including but not limited to geographical
stakeholder and relevant skill sets.
Now, obviously, we could give a sort of -- a much longer nonexhaustive list of what kinds of diversity needs to be there. But I
think my take-away from the conversation the other day is that
the most important thing is you need to have a diversity of
perspectives to get a full community input. Many of these things
are proxies for really the diversity of perspective, which is the
objective here and that what different kinds of perspectives you

Page 6 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

need is going to depend on the context of the -- of the specific
question being addressed.
So comments on that? Additional input? Yes, Marilyn.

MARILYN CADE:

My name is Marilyn Cade. I was thrilled when the red light came
on.
[ Laughter ]
I want to comment about the issue of diversity and recognize the
direction you're going in and one that I think is exactly the right
direction. In fact, because we are a quasi-technically based
policy organization different issues that may be addressed in a
cross-constituency working group may require different kinds of
expertise and knowledge.
So one might require a very deep range of technical expertise
while another might require a more -- a broader spectrum of
legal policy, perspectives of affected stakeholders, et cetera.
And I think the direction you're going in sets the kind of general
headings that then each chartered group can fill in what fits the
issue that they are chartered to address.
I also want to make a comment about quotas.

I am very

opposed to quotas, and I say that because I'm hearing in some

Page 7 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

other parts of the discussions about diversity that perhaps there
should be -- if there can only be two people from one group,
then there should only be two people from another group. And I
think we need to be careful about excluding input as opposed to
being inclusive.
And I think right now the way we're addressing that in the
present cross-community working groups is to have an addition
to members the category of participants and observers, which
allows us to bring in a much broader set of expertise and views.
Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

Thank you, Marilyn.

I just might add that our framework

assumes that sort of in the normal course, you will have the kind
of members and participants/observers arrangement so that
you get as many people who want to participate participating as
fully as possible, except in those rare instances when you need
to do some sort of a consensus call.
Other comments on diversity? Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

I'm sorry. Thank you very much. I think diversity is something
that we should just treat at the very, very high level but not go
into detail. There are diversities of diversities: Gender diversity,

Page 8 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

language diversity, cultural diversity, age diversity, geographical
diversity, and so on and so forth. So let us take them in a very
high-level manner and put some qualifier that should be
respected to the extent practicable and so on and so forth but
not go in detail because we never get out of that at all. Thank
you.

ANDERS HEKTOR:

Thank you my name is Anders Hektor, Swedish member of the
GAC. I have a question. I didn't participate actively in the CCWG
lately, so I don't know this. But when we speak of "diversity,"
does that include diversity of stakeholder groups being able to
be active in the practical work on mailing lists and phone calls
and so forth?
I know in the GAC, many colleagues have many other things in
their portfolio and have limited resources to participate in the
CC -- in the work of the CCWG. A few of them have done
tremendous work of participating. But, unfortunately, too few,
myself included, haven't been able to do that.
Whereas, I understood that there have been other groups that
have better resources to participate and be active on mailing
lists and so forth, which in sort of a way limits the diversity of
representation of groups. Is this included in your conception of
diversity? Thank you.

Page 9 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

BECKY BURR:

EN

So the structure that we identified as common and successful -and I want to stress that this is a framework. These are not hard
and fast rules -- would be that all of the SOs and ACs that are
affected in interest have the opportunity to become chartering
organizations. And then there would be equal reputation of
membership across that. And that's what has happened, for
example, with the accountability CCWG.
The issue that you point out, I think, is that, you know, when you
then open it up to participants and you give the participants,
you know, equal speaking and participation time, if one
particular perspective can throw a lot of bodies at it, that can be
-- you know, that can -- I don't think it necessarily limits
diversity, but it might create some imbalance.
I don't -- I think our proposal is that, you know, if you have a
situation where you really need to address that, the CCWG, as
part of the chartering process, can address it. But of course the
other place to address it is with good chairing skills, to make
sure that you hear from a diversity of people who are
participating.
And I must say that there were many members of the GAC who
have been participating in the CCWG, notwithstanding the fact
that they are not members. So a good chair can try to balance

Page 10 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

out differences in numbers or, you know, sort of bodies that can
-- you can throw at it, but I suppose there could be a situation
where you would want to limit participants, but that has not
been the inclination of the CCWGs to date, and there is nothing
about that arrangement that we could point to that was a
determination of the success or lack of success of a CCWG.
So we didn't see evidence to sort of change that arrangement.

JORGE CANCIO:

Hello.

Good afternoon.

This is Jorge Cancio, GAC rep for

Switzerland.
I'm just seeing this slide and I guess this is a step forward on
diversity. Probably we would need to look into this more in
detail, but it comes to me first that perhaps also mention to
arrangements needed to support diversity could be needed.
For instance, transcripts, translation whenever needed, or staff
support in assisting those who are nonnative English speakers or
writers, and so that could be one point.
And I'm not sure whether the second white bullet after the
second black bullet covers also the idea of trying to ensure that
those who have rapporteur roles or more leadership roles in the
CCWG at stake should also try to -- should also reflect the
diversity of the community which is participating in the CCWG.

Page 11 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

So I'm not sure whether that's included and what you also think
about the first part of my comment. Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So that's an interesting -- I mean, the focus of this, of course, was
not -- of the work was not on diversity, but it seems to me that
there is work in the community going on in the accountability
framework on diversity, and for the final report we can add a
note that the CCWG should take advantage of the learning that
comes out of that process, because I think that's where we will
talk about what is needed to support diversity in terms of, you
know, transcripts and the like.
But I take your point. I think that's a good point.
We have one remote --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

BECKY BURR:

Oh, it's not a remote person. It's Sebastien.

Page 12 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

EN

Sebastien Bachollet speaking. Thank you. If you allow me, I'm
going to speak in French. This is a bad habit that I have. I'm
sorry. I apologize for that.
First, I would like to congratulate the participants in this work
because I believe it is extremely important to take into account
diversity as a topic in itself and to see this from the very
beginning, and I think that this represents a big step forward.
Thanks to all the participants.
The topic of diversity has been addressed in different areas of
ICANN. It is very important. Data have been published. Data -some data has to be grouped. But if we want to be efficient, one
positive aspect of what you mentioned is that there should be a
collective decision made for the choice of the working group
members.
If the GAC chair and chair of the board were to participate in the
final election, looking at the different candidates, they could
also work on the aspect of diversity in that group.
In my professional life, let me say that whenever I had to
organize meetings of users, I always tried to look for somebody
who was not a top authority in that subject matter, somebody
who could bring into the discussion an external viewpoint, the
outsider point of view, somebody who could be a little bit

Page 13 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

outside of the discussion of the subject matter addressed at that
time.
So in the medium and long term, everybody can acquire
experience.
Diversity cannot be there overnight. It is true that diversity has
to be included and skills can be acquired over time. Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

Thank you. I think that your point about having an outsider or
different -- goes to the -- what I said at the beginning, that we're
taking from -- we're learning from this discussion about a
diversity of perspectives, and that's very consistent with that,
and that is definitely here.
As -- as -- we propose that we do have some deliberate focus on
diversity, sort of going in, by having the chartering organizations
consult with each other. We did not propose anything like an
external -- the chairman of the board and the chair of the GAC
appoint people. That seems to be inconsistent with where the
community was going on other parts of this sort of external
thing.
But we take your point.

Page 14 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

JOHN BERARD:

EN

I think it's also important to note that the suggestions, the
recommendations we're making, seek to wind through the
entire community so as to take advantage of the discussion
specifically about diversity that's happening at every level and in
every corner of the community.
So for a sponsoring SO or AC to have the re- -- the responsibility
of selecting the members for a cross-community working group,
that their experience, their intent to establish diversity would
flow upward into a cross-community working group rather than
seek to have the cross-community working group impose it on
each of the SOs and ACs that are choosing to participate.
So we're trying to take advantage of the movement that is
occurring and not trying to create something separate or from
our position outward.
Okay. So in keeping with our march through these four items in
the time allotted, we should move to budgeting and resources.
I will admit that the most pointed comment we got regarding
budgeting and resources came from the board, so -- not the only
source of the comment, but certainly the most sharply defined.
Our framework did not contain a recommendation about
budgeting or the need for -- or what to do, should there -- should
resources be required.

Page 15 of 48

As the -- as you can read, from

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

experience most cross-community working groups don't really
require more than the normal run of support and participation;
that the need for additional resources has been the purview of
the rather large and visible cross-community working groups
that we are most familiar with today, but should there need to
be budget requests, is there any reason why any method other
than seeking them through the normal channels that already
exist in the -- in ICANN's budgeting cycle.
And so the question, as we have posed it, is: Does the crosscommunity working group approach, which is to take advantage
of existing mechanisms, satisfy the development of crosscommunity working groups in the future?

BECKY BURR:

And if I could just add one point, since we put together these
slides, of course we have seen a lot of movement forward on the
budgeting process and there is a process that's been put in place
for the CCWG accountability Work Stream 2 work, and it
probably makes sense to add a note in the report that it will
make sense to review how well those mechanisms worked and
whether they were tweaked -- whether they need to be tweaked
in any future large-scale CCWG outside of the ordinary course
where, really, the work is done remotely on calls and the
chartering organizations are taking care of resource allocation

Page 16 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

because they are deciding whether they have the resources
within their current allocation.
You know, so whether the CCW- -- the ccNSO can spare Bart to
work on this and the GNSO can spare Mary to work on this or
whether you need to go outside of that.
So I think that might make sense to add something on that.
But if we could hear from folks on the budgeting issue.

JOHN BERARD:

Sure. I will say that it was our -- this is a leap forward for the
working group on this matter because we did not think that
there needed to be discussion, comment, recommendations on
seeking additional resources but it was the feedback from the
community that suggested that our recommendations -- or the
recommendations needed to be more sharply set, particularly
because of the -- the ongoing activities of the rather large crosscommunity working groups on transition and accountability.
Chuck?

CHUCK GOMES:

Chuck Gomes. Thanks, John, and thanks, Becky.
I'm glad in your last bullet there, the sub-bullet, that you put "as
far as possible" for using the annual budget cycle, because the

Page 17 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

timing of the start of a cross-community working group is really
critical. The budget process takes a year, just about, each year,
and so if you hit that incorrectly it makes it kind of difficult.
I wish I had an easy solution to deal with that. I can't, right off
the top of my head here. But I do wonder if some exception
procedure should be provided for, either through contingencies
or whatever, and maybe it's already provided for because the
budget typically requires some contingency funds and so forth.
But if you hit it at the wrong time, it's a long time before you get
in the cycle again.
So again, I clearly see the language "as far as possible," but if
there's not some flexibility built into the budget, that could be a
problem if a cross-community working group starts at the wrong
time.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you, Chuck. That assumes that the cross-community
working group that's impaneled needs additional resources,
right?
I mean, the -- our expectation, as we went through these
discussions, was that in the normal course of business that there
really wouldn't be anything that -- out of the ordinary. Working
groups are impaneled by SOs fairly regularly on an irregular

Page 18 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

schedule. They proceed through their work and report back to
their chartering organizations. So we began with that routine
model, but appreciate that there may, in fact, be a need for
additional resources and that sometimes those resources might
be needed outside of the normal cycle, but that we should seek
to use the existing circumstance- -- the existing processes as
best as -- as often as possible.
Any other questions? Ah. Let's see. Alan or --

ALAN GREENBERG:

Okay.

JOHN BERARD:

Oh, Chris. Alan, why don't you hold on one second. We'll start
with Chris.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Of course.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

Thanks, Alan. Appreciate that.
A couple of things. The reason why -- the reasons why you might
run into problems, the number of people involved, and if there's
a deadline, it's the deadlines that tend to cause the issue

Page 19 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

because if you look at it, it's like we've got to do it by then, so,
therefore, we need to have extra meetings and we need to have
face-to-face meetings and they need to be paid.
So I agree with you. I think we should -- Becky and I have talked
about this. We should actually rename the CWG and the CCWG
stewardship and accountability as something else. Let's call
them Mack and Mabel. And remember that apart from them,
CCWG sort of generally have been stuff that's just happened
within the confines of normal ICANN meetings, and so on.
That said, a question arises as to whether anything that flows
from the new bylaws and the new mechanisms that we're
putting in place might make it more likely -- I don't know, but
might make it more likely that we end up with a need for those.
So whether or not we could build in some sort of process to
enable -- What's abundantly clear is that the current situation in
respects to the CCWGs, working groups that are running, the big
ones, is there is no process, and there has to be something. So I
do think we need to work on that. And I think that there's some
work being done on the Work Stream 2 side which may be
helpful.
But I think in the main, you're right, you mostly won't have to,
but I don't think that negates a reason for having some sort of
mechanism in place to fix it if you do need to. And I think we

Page 20 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

may be able to build on what we're doing in Work Stream 2.
Perhaps.
Thanks.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you, Chris. We'll go back to Alan.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

I'd like to pass the mic, then, to Alan. Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

So are you proposing now there be something called an
Empowered Cross-Community Working Group?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone)

JOHN BERARD:

Alan.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Yes, thank you. Two aspects. As Chris just implied, the CWG,
CCWG and its huge legal bills are an edge case, and let's
recognize that as such.

Page 21 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

There is a model for things that are not exclusive generics cases.
There is a budget allocation for the GNSO to cover the
occasional PDP face-to-face meetings, usually attached to an
ICANN meeting. It's an envelope funding that is done annually,
and should the GNSO Council decide that a face to face is
warranted, and, of course, should our new meeting schedule
allow it, then there is a budget allocation that covers that. At
least that's how it was done up until a year or two ago.
It's now changed? Mary tells me it's now changed. I don't know
what I'm speaking about so we'll skip that part, and Mary can
tell us how it is now -- how they are now funded, if they were to
ever happen again.
My real concern is not the allocation of the money because it can
be done through special allocations, exceptional cases, annual
budgets, whatever the formula is in use.
The real problem is the control of use of the money and how one
-- I mean, right now we're talking about that the co-chairs of a
CCWG should be held responsible for the budget allocation, or
maybe we're talking about the chairs of the ACs and SOs that
chartered it be held responsible. But they don't have any real
mechanism to control what the CCWG does.
In general, our co-chairs make rulings on who can speak. They
may judge -- make rulings on consensus calls. They don't say

Page 22 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

you can't do something. They don't say we have to, you know,
doing something radically different.
So neither of those really have control over how the money is
spent once it's allocated and how one controls it, and that part I
-- you know, I think has to be resolved. That's adding a new
responsibility to our chairs or co-chairs that we have not had to
do before.
Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

Thank you, Alan. And I think that's correct, but I think the
mechanism that is now being tested allocates responsibility
both to the chartering organizations and to the chairs. And so
we're going to need to see if that works.

ALAN GREENBERG:

It's not working anymore -- oh, now it is.
Yes, and I'll tell you confidentially, to this whole group, there's a
lot of pushback with the chairs of the chartering organizations
that if you're going to give them responsibilities, you need to
give them tools and things like that, and it's not 100% clear that
we have the tools.

Page 23 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

So even though we haven't tried it yet, there are some
significant concerns.
Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you, Alan.
Mary wants to offer a clarification.

MARY WONG:

Thank you, John.
Thank you, Alan, for the comments. This is really more for those
who are not familiar with the example that Alan gave and for the
transcript; that the funding he was talking about for the GNSO
working groups began as a pilot project. And therefore, it was a
special budget request that was put in by the GNSO Council as
part of ICANN's regular budget planning cycle.

That was

obviously to test the efficacy of this kind of mechanism.
I want to highlight, though, that it is not a significant amount of
money at all. It is not given to all PDP working groups. Certainly
that is based on a selection process as well as the group itself
deciding whether it has reached a phase in its life cycle that a
face-to-face meeting might be appropriate and the Council signs
off on that.

Page 24 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

Just as importantly, though, like I said, it's not a significant
amount of money. It doesn't cover the full travel, and it certainly
doesn't cover every participant in that working group. And that
is now folded into the regular budget for the GNSO.
And if I may just add another comment, back to I think what
Chuck and Chris were saying, that because this is a fairly difficult
thing to anticipate in advance, and as Becky was saying, the
charter itself and the chartering organizations would have that
ability and the discretion to discuss and to decide what kind of
mechanism or accountability reporting, as far as possible, to put
that in the charter.
On top of that, in the pre-chartering process, what we have in
the document does say that the potential chartering
organizations need to ask themselves a series of questions
before embarking on a Cross-Community Working Group. And
one of these questions includes whether or not adequate or
sufficient community and ICANN resources are available to start
another group. Another question is whether the anticipated
work and outcome is likely to have a substantial budgetary
impact as well.

JOHN BERARD:

Page 25 of 48

Thank you, Mary.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

We have Kavouss.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes.
If the Cross-Community Working Group had a deadline and if it
required a face-to-face meeting, in certain circumstances, would
we also think of some fellowship for those people from
developing country? At least if you are dealing with the diversity
issues, in order to enable them, in case they are a member.
So if you have a member and this member coming from this, if
you do not have that possibility, they would not be in a position
to attend.
So that is the question, on the case-by-case basis and under
certain circumstances.
Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you for that.
I'd like to assert, without having asked my colleagues who have
gone through this with me, that we're not suggesting that there
be any limit to what could be done, but that the -- the essential
work of a Cross-Community Working Group begins with a
charter that can be approved by all.

Page 26 of 48

And in that charter

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

discussion it may, in fact, arise that there be a need for a desire
to include people who would not normally be able to fund
themselves.
The question is could it be done or could it be handled in some
other way?
So we sought not to impose rules but to offer a set of rails on
which a Cross-Community Working Group could ride.
And so the originating SOs and ACs have the ability to deliberate
and suggest, recommend, and persuade the other partners to a
host of characteristics.
So we're not seeking to limit as much as we are to offer a
direction.
So if diversity is an essential element for the work of the CrossCommunity Working Group, if the diversity that it seeks requires
that people who would not otherwise be able to participate
participate, then I think that they would seek to make
arrangements for that.
But based upon, as I said at the beginning, the origin story of our
work, that was -- that would be outside -- certainly outside the
initial -- our initial field of vision.

Page 27 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

Okay. One more question. Then we'll move on to the next
subject.

ASHWIN:

Thank you. Ashwin from Indonesia.
From the first one and the second one. And perhaps it's also
okay for third one. Perhaps the working group can also consider
the possibilities of strengthening the community working group
at a national and even regional level.
Now we have the international Cross-Community Working Group
but if we can also strengthen the national one, and I'm sure the
GAC can always do the facilitation for that. Facilitation, not
necessarily leading that. Not necessarily lead it or chair it; just
facilitating it. And perhaps we can have a more global -- more
global cross-community group.
As a matter of fact, Indonesia, we are discussing this. And
perhaps, most likely, in the next IGF meeting in Mexico -- I forget
the months; the end of this year if I'm not mistaken -- Indonesia
would like to throw out this idea.
We have the international multistakeholder organizations. Then
we should also have to strengthen the national multistakeholder
organization and perhaps later regional multistakeholder
organization. That might be a new organization system globally.

Page 28 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

We already have a U.N. organizations, like U.N. ITU, U.N. UPU,
whatever. We have IGO organizations, like WTO, whatever, ICRC,
Red Cross. And perhaps the next one, we can strengthen the
international multistakeholder organization consisting of all the
people, but it has to be restructured also.
We have the international level, global level, we have the
regional level, but also we have to strengthen the national level.
So that is things we are discussing now, and perhaps we'd like to
throw it in the next IGF and -- well, I am throwing it here, but
perhaps it can also be discussed then, discussed also in the
working group for this Cross-Community Working Group,
because more or less it is similar.
Thank you very much.

BECKY BURR:

Thank you. That's a very interesting idea. I mean, obviously we
do have our RALO systems here, and that is a mechanism where
we can engage people locally or more regionally, at least.
My understanding is that ICANN, along with other ISTAR
organizations, are really looking hard at this question of
decision-making remotely and really working on sort of
facilitating that which would have the -- it would necessarily be
strengthening the local, national, or regional processes.

Page 29 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

And so, again, I think the suggestion is a very good one. It is a bit
outside of our remit here, but we can note -- I think we can note
that in the final report and note the work that -- I know that
ICANN has an initiative to really just look at those kinds of issues
and how you -- you know, how you avoid the need to fly
everybody halfway across the globe to get this kind of work
done.
Okay. We're going to move to the next issue, the consensus
issue, and the question about whether there is a need to change
the suggested definition and methodology for determining
consensus.
One of the interesting things about consensus here is that
different groups within ICANN have more or less sort of
elaborate descriptions for what they mean by consensus. So I
can tell you that in the ccNSO we follow a very simple consensus
rule. We want basically people to agree to the extent that there
is no one saying I'm willing to die in a ditch over this issue. So
this is the Eberhard Lisse memorial discussion -- definition of
consensus.

Nobody is willing to die in a ditch to prevent

acceptance of this -- of that proposal.
It works pretty well in the ccNSO. But in the GNSO there is a
much more elaborate articulation about full consensus where
no group -- there's no minority position. There's, in other words,

Page 30 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

an absence of objection consensus where a small minority
disagrees with most agree. You know, that would permit -obviously, in the absence of full consensus minority perspectives
would be submitted. And if the chairs are unable to determine
whether consensus exists on an issue or not, the chartering
organizations would be -- become involved in order to see if
there's a way to close the gap or to decide whether there's no
way of moving this forward.
Some of the comments we received suggested that we needed
to have more detail on deriving consensus, including clearer
standards about who's involved in consensus, so members
versus participants. This gets a little bit at ensuring that when
you are -- when you are making consensus calls the balance that
you set up in the original construct is sort of preserved and not
thrown out of kilter by, you know, groups that have more
participants than not. So, you know, you go in and you set up a
balance. And if you're looking to -- to determine whether or not
consensus exists, you maybe go back to that kind of allocated
opinions there.
So some other -- some of the other comments were concerned
about groups' ability to block consensus by objecting to them.
Again, I think this goes a little bit to the, you know, can you get
really committed folks to stay in there and just object over and

Page 31 of 48

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

over again? How do you -- at what point do you say we've
discussed this a lot of times. We're going to call for consensus.
Our conclusion was that we think the concerns really are
addressed through a bunch of the other recommendations and
so typically, you know, the consensus -- the way the consensus
calls worked, to the extent they actually existed, and it really
didn't -- haven't existed because we have tried in the -- both the
CWG and the CCWG and in the other cross-community working
groups, we've really tried to get -- you know, come pretty close
to consensus where nobody was, you know, screaming or they
felt like, you know, they were getting -- you know, on things that
they cared about, they were able to make their points and they
were -- you know, that there was sufficient give-and-take to
identify consensus in a more informal manner.

I -- the

discussion in the recommendations in the framework does talk
about this and does talk about the need to think about what the
standard that you're going to have going in and how you will
have consensus calls. And so it was our conclusion, based on a
review,

that

we

really

don't

need

to

change

the

recommendation, which is you should make a decision going in
about how you're going to determine consensus and what
you're going to do if you are not able to identify consensus,
either on a particular issue or on the issue collectively.

Page 32 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

So the floor's open for comments on whether we need to have -whether people believe we need to have something much more
rigid and specified with respect to that or whether it is -- we're
still in a -- in a learning phase and the right way to proceed is to
continue to develop -- to say, first of all, think about it and
identify the processes going in and continue to get more
information about how this works.

Jorge first, and then

Kavouss.

JORGE CANCIO:

Thank you very much for giving me the floor again. And sorry for
-- for coming back to something I suggested in the public
comment period. But I -- I think it's a -- it's a very important
point and also something which at least for me is part of the
learning process in the CCWGs. But it's also something you learn
in other -- in other venues, in other fora. And this is the -- the
idea that the consensus needs, in my view, also a level of
positive support. To define consensus, just in negative terms, as
an absence of a small minority or no minority brings with it or
has in it some dangers. There is the possibility that a small
minority runs the process. Those with more resources, those
with more direct interests, those which are better prepared and
they are the ones putting the -- in the questions. There -- there
may be a majority of the members of the group which don't
want to die in a ditch against that proposal from the leading

Page 33 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

minority so they accept. And there might be a small minority
opposing, but according to the definition, well, if it's one or two,
it's still consensus. But we would have given the direction of the
process to -- potentially to a small minority, if they are the ones
making the questions and the majority is -- is silent.
So I think in -- we don't have to forcefully to -- to overengineer
the rules but include an idea that by some sort of polling or
some different means we know and we have used also in the -in the CCWG just to make sure at some point of time that this is
not only something which is forcefully put forward by a minority
and is passively accepted by -- by a large majority that doesn't
want to die in a ditch but that's actually this consensus finds a
good level of expressed support. That's the idea I wanted to
convey. Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you for that.

I would suggest that we may be

undermining the ultimate validity of our recommendations by
going through them one at a time when, in fact, the
recommendations are a systemic set of checks and balances to
prevent just the kind of capture that you're talking about. The
fact that the chartering organizations have to come to
agreement on a single charter, the fact that there are -- there is
the ability to create a set of a specific number of members, a -- a

Page 34 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

chartering organization that worries about capture might
suggest that the number of members be small, that there be
three or instead of five or five instead of ten, so as to create a
balance within the discussion that leads to the -- the consensus.
And also, not being able to reach consensus is a reasonable
outcome of a cross-community working group. So we should
not think of -- of not being able to reach consensus as failure if
we have managed to probe the edges of the discussion to
everybody's satisfaction.
So we're -- we believe that we've created a set -- a systemic set
of checks and balances that prevent any one bit from becoming
a problem for the entire process. Next?

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Thank you. I think we should not make the life difficult for
ourself. If you go into too much detail of this we will tie our
hands in the end. This is something very important. I have
worked on this issue in ICG. Hundreds of email were exchanged.
Finally we come to something which is called consensus
building process. That's all. But we did not go to too much
detail. If you say minority, it is not clear really what minority
means. You put an adjective to minority, small, you put another
difficulty. So the things that we could say that generally
expected that decision made by the agreement of the people

Page 35 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

and so on and so forth. But if there are some objections,
chairman or leader of the group try to minimize those in
discussing with them to see whether they point to it. At the end,
they will be allowed to give some statement, and that's all. And
we should not go to the cases that one or two or a particular
group stop the whole process because of that saying there is no
consensus and it stops. So that would be very risky. Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you. Chuck.

CHUCK GOMES:

Is that on? Is it on now? There we go. Thanks, again. This is
Chuck Gomes speaking. I support what you -- what you have
proposed. Becky, first of all, I think you made a really strong
point that there -- and John, you reinforced it in some of what
you said -- in that there are lots of other mechanisms in the
proposed process that feed into this and provide balance.
Ultimately in a cross-community working group, even whatever
the cross-community working group does, it's going to have to
go to the sponsoring organizations to approve. So you have
checks and balances there on it.
One thing I think is important, and John, you hit on this, we
shouldn't assume that failure to reach consensus is bad. That

Page 36 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

just means that there's not enough agreement -- I mean,
consensus shouldn't be equal with simple majority. You don't
want too easy a consensus because you want the working group
to keep striving to get more agreement, to make modifications
until they can get more agreement. And if you make it too easy
for consensus, there won't be a motivation to get a better set of
recommendations. So I support what you -- what you have
there.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you, Chuck.

One of the other aspects of the

recommendations that we haven't talked about is that we
believe there needs to be more persistent communication
between the chartering organization and its members on the
cross-community working group so that there can be more
consultation as opposed to just a final hey, we did or we didn't.
And in that consultation you can bring even more influence or
cooperation into the process. And so I -- I really feel confident
that one of the best aspects of these recommendations, even
absent the endorsement of the community, is the set of checks
and balances that help guide and -- the process to a successful,
whether consensus or not, end.
Yeah, we should go on to the next session, B. Go on to the next
slide, 4. Slide 4.

Page 37 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

MARY WONG:

Section 4.

JOHN BERARD:

Yeah, Section 4.

EN

So the -- we are respectful of the -- of how new this process can
seem and the possibility that the recommendations of a crosscommunity working group might -- that a draft framework
acknowledges that this would be an area where a community
has the least experience to draw from, which is implementing its
recommendations.
The proposed framework has additional detail. In formulating
its recommendations, we sought to refer to incorporate the
policy and implementation guidelines developed by the GNSO
because we didn't want to make things up that we didn't have
to. If it existed and it was useful, we wanted to bolt it in.
If the cross-community working group believes it is necessary to
be involved in implementation, this has to be a part of the up
front work. And if the -- if there is agreement that there should
be a time line and a task list for the cross-community working
group during implementation, then that also should be
considered and agreed to up front.

Page 38 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

So the question is: Does the fact that this is a relatively new
activity, certainly with a heightened sense of attention, does the
cross-community working group's additional recommendations
suffice as a guideline for future cross-community working
groups? I mean, are we doing enough here now to help those in
the future be successful? I think that's the source -- the root of
that, yes? Yeah.

BECKY BURR:

Yeah. And if I could just add, what we contemplate here is that -you know, is sort of what you expect when you set this up, when
you charter it, is you expect a beginning and an end of the
process with a middle. And it's not, you know, an evergreen
working group that goes on and on forever.

If you need

something like that, we need to think about carefully whether a
CCWG, which is intended to sort of drive consensus building or
help build consensus on certain issues as opposed to
implementation.
So in the ordinary course, what you're talking about is reaching
the consensus, bolting in the policy and implementation
guidelines into that and sort of ending the CCWG when it reaches
its natural end.
We understand that in some cases, there may be some need for
implementation oversight. But what we are suggesting is that

Page 39 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

it's important to think about that going in to make that part of
your plan and part of the deliverables that you are identifying.
So it's not just a, "Oh, you know, we really didn't finish our work
but let's -- let's launch it and continue on in our policy work
while we're doing it." That's the kind of thing that tends to get
us in trouble and turn into an endless working group. So that
was really the goal of those recommendations.
Chris, you had your hand up.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

Sorry. Can't get it into my head that the microphones don't
work. I guess I'm just a little -- so it comes up with a series of
recommendations. The recommendations go to the chartering
organizations and then that's approved by the chartering
organizations and staff implement, right?
So I'm just -- I'm just a little concerned that it's a CCWG that's
kind of got -- following this sort of pattern of a reasonably small
membership but then wide-open participation. Every time an
implementation step gets taken, it's going to have to be a
meeting of the -- not talking about cost so much, it's more about
logistics -- it's going to have to be a meeting of the CCWG, et
cetera.

Page 40 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

I wonder whether there isn't a better way forward, which is to
say that if the CCWG recommends to the chartering
organization, the chartering organization should impanel an
implementation oversight group which would be smaller than
the CCWG itself and specifically tasked with oversighting
implementation rather than prolonging the existence of the
CCWG which may have grown significantly over time because of
an interest in a particular aspect of the topic but may not
necessarily have the agility to deal with implementation.
Thanks.

BECKY BURR:

So that seems like a really good to me to incorporate. And that's
really how we have done it.
So what you want to do is to the extent that you need to keep an
eye on implementation, you need to think about doing it in an
efficient way. And what we -- I think we were trying to get at that
by saying, you know, just don't let this drag out forever. Decide
up front. But I think we could maybe add a comment about
that.
Kavouss?

Page 41 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

JOHN BERARD:

EN

Before that, what you -- your point, Chris, is exactly where we
had been -- had arrived ourselves. It's unlikely -- you know,
there's -- is something likely to happen, or is it unlikely to
happen? It's unlikely that there would be a need for any postimplementation work on the part of the cross-community
working group? But if it were to, a smaller, lighter weight,
smaller number of those people could be brought to bear to
provide -- answer questions about what did you really mean
when you said this or what was the discussion like or how can
we -- how can we better understand what it is that you were
driving at?

But it's -- in terms of a likely/unlikely span of

activities, I think it's going to be more on the unlikely side of
things.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. I think this has also been discussed to some extent. I don't
think it is cost effective that the ones who develop the
recommendation be responsible or be involved in the
implementation. However, there might be a need to have some
sort of monitoring or keeping an eye, whatever term you use, for
short period of time to see whether it is properly understood or
not, just for short period of time.
Not exact example, one example of that was CCWG
accountability had the recommendation.

Page 42 of 48

It wanted to be

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

converted into the legal provisions. They had some sort of short
period to see whether during the implementation there are
questions, there are things to be clarified and clarify that. A very
short period of time, some sort of monitoring but not forever.
Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you. We have another one. Alan?

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you.

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Again, taking the CWG IANA and the CCWG accountability as
edge cases, experience with other working groups shows that
people lose interest real quick. And it's hard sometimes finding
enough people to act as the implementation review team. I
don't think the concern normally is it's going to be too large and
how do we handle it. That seems to manage itself just because.
Now, maybe we will have something which is so onerous and so
serious that it will replicate what we're seeing here, but I have
my doubts.

Page 43 of 48

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you for that dose of practical advice, Alan.
If there are no other questions on this -- oh, Chuck. I'm sorry.
We'll close with Chuck. And then I want to leave a few minutes
for anything -- any other suggestions from the floor.
Chuck.

CHUCK GOMES:

I'll try and be brief. Chuck Gomes again and as you might guess,
I support that first sub-bullet there on the policy and
implementation guidelines, since I was co-chair of that group,
but I'd like to point out that that -- doing that and doing the next
bullet might be a little bit inconsistent, because the policy and
implementation

guidelines

assumed

a

responsibility

of

continuity there. Not being the implementation group, but they
recommended an IRT, an implementation review team, and they
recommend some guide- -- some liaisons from that group who
have the knowledge to ensure the intent is followed.
So, you might want to think about rewording that second bullet
because the assumption in the policy and implementation
guidelines is that there is some -- there needs to be a connection
between policy development and implementation.

Doesn't

have to be the same people. Don't get me wrong. But there

Page 44 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

needs to be that connection. So you might want to think about
that a little bit.
I think the policy and implementation guidelines assume there's
some -- there needs to be a necessary connection. Okay?

JOHN BERARD:

Thank you, Chuck. So you're suggesting that they're redundant.

CHUCK GOMES:

No. No. I'm saying that the second bullet doesn't -- the way it's
worded would not be consistent with the policy and
implementation guidelines.
Now, I think your intent in the second bullet is probably okay,
but I don't believe it's -- that they're consistent.

JOHN BERARD:

All right. So we will turn that over to our wordsmiths.
Now, before we break, are there any other comments from the
folks here that we did not have on our agenda but are equally
important to raise?
We have Sebastien and we have Steve.
Why don't you go ahead, Steve.

Page 45 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

STEVE METALITZ:

EN

Thank you. Steve Metalitz. I don't know if it's equally important
to raise, but as I went through the document, I found it kind -one part of it a bit confusing and I would encourage the group to
take another look at it. That's 3.4 on decision-making and
closure.

And really, I'm referencing what the chartering

organizations are supposed to do or have the option to do, once
the CCWG has completed its -- or, you know, has completed its
work.
It seems to imply that there are four options, approving,
adopting, supporting, or at a minimum not objecting to. I wasn't
sure what the difference was among those.
The next paragraph says there's something called "accepting,"
which is yet another verb that may mean some of the same
things or something different.
And there's also a reference that the default expectation is that
all the chartering organizations will, at a minimum, not object to
the CCWG final deliverable.
By using the phrase "default expectation," are you intending to
say that if a chartering organization does not respond, then it
will be assumed that it did not object?

Page 46 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

EN

I just think that ought to be clarified because as we start thinking
about what the chartering organizations have -- would have to
do under this framework, it's just a little unclear what their
options are at that point and what your intentions were.
Thank you.

BECKY BURR:

So just to -- just to -- we'll take a look at that and be clear, but I
think the most important takeaway is that they need to decide
what they're going to do, how much support is necessary and
what kind of support is necessary.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Yes. Thank you. Okay. In English.
I have a question about the naming because we are talking in
this organization about CCWG for everything, and can you
recommend something about the fact that we stop to have
CCWG everywhere but we give a name with what is the content
of the work we will have to fulfill? It will be much more easy to
understand in the future by other people outside of this
organization or coming first, and even us, because everything is
a CWG in those days and I don't know what they are about.
Thank you.

Page 47 of 48

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Draft Framework of Principles for Future CCWGs

BECKY BURR:

EN

I think -- I -- the name -- the name -- your concern is about a
naming convention and I think that's a very interesting point
because we have the CWG and the CCWG and it's not clear -- it's
just the order that they got named in and those acronyms are
not all that different and they don't really communicate to folks
what they're about, and I think that's a -- actually quite a good
point.

JOHN BERARD:

I see no other hands, so we can call this session to a close.
Thank you for attending.
[ Applause ]

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 48 of 48

