HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 08:30 to 09:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Ladies and gentlemen, we’ll be starting our event in just a few
minutes. If you want to get your coffee now and move up
towards the stage, we’ll begin very shortly. Thank you.
Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome David Olive, Senior Vice
President Policy Development and Support.

DAVID OLIVE:

Thank you, ladies and gentlemen, fellow ICANN members of the
community. Welcome to Helsinki. I am pleased to kick off ICANN
56 Policy Forum.
Thank you to our generous hosts and to you for making the
considerable commitment of time and effort to attend this
meeting. But this meeting is one of important firsts: our first
ICANN meeting in Helsinki – thank you very much; the first
meeting of our new President and CEO, Göran Marby; and the
first meeting following the new community proposed format, a
Policy Forum, an opportunity for innovation and change in our
discussions.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

As you know, ICANN holds three international public meetings
per year around the globe that are free and open to all
participants. Whether in person or remotely, they can be part of
our sessions. But this ICANN meeting will be different, and what
is changing today and for this week. The ICANN 56 Policy Forum
will be a four-day meeting with sessions focused on policy and
advisory development work and some outreach activities. The
supporting organizations and advisory committees have taken
the lead in organizing the program. This is the core work of
ICANN:

community-driven

consensus

policy

and

advice

development for the top level of the Internet’s naming system
and for facilitating other unique Internet identifiers.
Our morning sessions will be dedicated to individual and joint
sessions of the supporting organizations and advisory
committees. Afternoon sessions will focus on cross community
sessions to explore topics of various ongoing policy or advice
work. There’ll be no formal ceremony (we have this wonderful
opening today like this), no public meeting of the ICANN Board,
and no public forum. But we will have networking receptions
each night and will allow you as participants to interact and
engage outside of your busy work program.
We will see robust debate, discussions, disagreements, and
some compromises. A global community of stakeholders and
participants from many backgrounds are here with various

Page 2 of 19

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

points of view to help coordinate and support policies that keep
the Internet secure, stable, and interoperable.
The Internet functions for everyone because everyone is invited
to help make it function. Consensus policies developed by our
multistakeholder model give our results both effectiveness and
the greatest legitimacy.
Today we also welcome 15 individuals from various universities
in Europe who have been selected to participate with the ICANN
community members in our Policy Forum. They have
backgrounds

in

policy,

business,

security,

law,

and

communications, and they also have some people who are part
of our Next Generation program serving as ambassadors for
them. So please welcome them to your sessions and make sure
that they can be a part of our activities this week.
And I think a fitting beginning is this morning we will also
announce the recipients of this year’s Multistakeholder Ethos
Award. This award was launched in 2014 to recognize ICANN
participants who have deeply invested in the consensus building
solutions,

acknowledging

the

importance

of

ICANN’s

multistakeholder role, and contributed in substantive ways to
the higher interests of the ICANN organization and its
community.

Page 3 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

Let me also ask you to download the mobile application to stay
updated on all the activities and features of today’s program
and this week’s sessions, and also provide feedback for the
individual sessions. Your input will be important as we review
and assess this new Policy Forum format.
Finally, no matter if you are an ICANN regular, an occasional
participant, or a newcomer, I encourage you to actively
participate in this meeting either directly or remotely and enjoy
the Finnish hospitality. Thank you so much.
And now Göran Marby.

GORAN MARBY:

Good morning. This [with] speaking notes is very interesting. In
my speaking notes it says I should say, ‘Welcome,’ ‘Good
morning,’ and then it says, ‘insert an anecdote or a comment
about Helsinki.’ So I had to figure something out.
I actually lived in Helsinki 20 years ago for a year when I was
working for an operator. That was in the heydays where the
European Telecom [inaudible] opened up, and it’s one of the
best years of my life. I absolutely love Helsinki [after] that time
and I’m very happy to share Helsinki with you because I feel sort
of, sort of, very much home here. I hope [Finley’s] colleagues will
not disagree with me.

Page 4 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

This is, as you said, my first meeting. Last meeting when I met
some of you in Marrakech I was a trainee. Since then I’ve been
upgraded. I now worked as the CEO a little bit more over a
month, and I think it’s very timely for me to be really the first
[time] here. Because this is a new type of meeting. It’s a works
meeting. It’s about really making sure that policies are driven
forward, the thing you do. And with the new Bylaws coming in, it
also means that I have a new role compared to my predecessor
in my organization. I just [inaudible] like to share with you – and
I spoke to some of you about it – but I would like to share with
you a little bit about what we say.
It might come as a surprise for you that I don’t see myself as the
President and the CEO of ICANN. The Board now looked at me
with, “Oh?” Actually, we’re together are ICANN – the Board, the
community, and the organization I represent. It’s a trinity. We’re
in this together. And that’s a very important statement, because
I see myself and my organization and my team as someone who
is a support organization to the community and to the Board.
I’m not the person who’s going to involve myself in the policy
making process. My job is to facilitate the possibility for the
multistakeholder model and for you to do your work.
The new Bylaws, the new set-up, is making a clearer point
between my responsibilities and yours. And I happen to think
that’s very positive. Because in an era where we’re now coming –

Page 5 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

actually now there has been some milestones in the transition
process over the last couple of weeks and months – in that era
when we’re now going forward we have a greater responsibility
than we had before. And therefore I think it’s very important to
make that [inaudible] clear.
This is not something that I dreamt up when I came in. This is
something with the Board and myself together with my team
which we worked a lot with. As you probably have seen, I also
renamed my Executive Team from global leaders to Executive
Team just to show also the fact that we are a support
organization going forward.
We are here as a team to support you because you are the ones
who are actually going to do the job. You’re the ones going to
make the decisions, a very important thing to do. I’ve said many
times over the last couple of weeks that we actually only wrote
the first chapter in the book of Internet. Together with you,
together with all our partners around the Internet, we’re going
to now write the next book. So therefore, I won’t keep you any
longer. Go back to work. Thank you very much.

DAVID OLIVE:

I’d like to ask Steve Crocker to come up and say a few words as
well. Steve, please.

Page 6 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

STEVE CROCKER:

EN

Well, on behalf of the Board I welcome you. I want to cover two
things. First of all, probably not uppermost in our mind, but this
is a serendipitously a historic time and place for us to be. As
David emphasized and as Göran emphasized, this is a policyoriented meeting with the focus on getting work done, a limited
amount of ceremony. About 40 years ago, this very hall was the
site of the Helsinki Accords which also resulted in a significant
step forward of cooperation across the world. Totally different
subject matter, much less important than the weighty matters
that we have here today, but I thought it’s exciting to be here
and to be getting down to work in the very place, this hall – I
don’t know whether it was this room – but this building that the
Helsinki Accords were completed in 1975.
On behalf of the Board, I want to echo and emphasize what’s
been said. The Board’s posture, particularly for this week, is to
be completely supportive. We have no meetings – almost no
meetings – of our own scheduled throughout the week. Our job
is to be helpful, to be aware and involved in what you’re doing,
to stay out of the way as much as possible, and to be hopeful
that everybody comes away from this meeting with a great
success in actual work done and a very positive feeling.

Page 7 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

It is, of course, as any first version of something is, a bit of an
experiment and so we’re all watching keenly to see what works,
what doesn’t work, looking for feedback, and we’ll make
adjustments and we noted that because we now have these
three different kinds of meetings each year, that an adjustment
to this meeting is a year off and so the response time and the
ability to remember what happened a year earlier will be a bit
challenging. But we’re geared up for it.
And with that, let’s proceed. Thank you.

DAVID OLIVE:

And now I would like to introduce Donna Austin, the Vice Chair of
the Generic Names Supporting Organization Council and
spokesperson for the community selection panel for the next
part of our program. Donna, please.

DONNA AUSTIN:

Thank you, David. Before I kick off, I just want to acknowledge
that there were 10 members of the panel that spent quite a
considerable amount of time discussing the recipients for the
Multistakeholder Ethos Award, and most of them are over to this
side of the stage and they’ll join me at the end of this for photos.
So I’ll get into it. Excuse my glasses.

Page 8 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

I’m pleased to announce that the cross-community evaluation
panel for the 2016 ICANN Multistakeholder Ethos Award has
selected two long-time community members as this year’s
award recipients. The panel decided to recognize two recipients
because we felt that both met the award criteria in such
distinctive ways that both should be recognized for the
examples they set for others as key players in the ICANN
community

with

diverse

backgrounds,

geography,

and

community impacts.
The two recipients were selected from a list of 19 nominees as
the two who best demonstrate the spirit of collaboration with
other community members with the aim of consensus building
while providing their dedication to ICANN’s multistakeholder
model through their active participation over many years. I don’t
know the total of the two recipients that we have but I think
we’re probably pushing into close to 40 or 50 years if we
combine both recipients.
I am pleased to announce that our panel has selected Chuck
Gomes – I don’t need to say anything more, do I? So Chuck was
the first Chair of the Registry Stakeholder Group and was
instrumental in the development and operations throughout the
years. He served as the GNSO Counselor, including terms as Vice
Chair and Chair. Chuck has volunteered his time and services to
innumerable working groups and drafting teams, and he’s the

Page 9 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

current Chair of the Next Generation Registration Data Services
Working Group. I don’t know. I’ve got the acronyms here, but I
thought I’d try to spell it out but I can’t remember the name.
Most recently, he has made timely and substantial contributions
to the Cross-Community Working Group for the IANA Steward
Transition, acting as liaison between the Cross Community
Working Group and the Cross Community-Working Group for
Accountability. His experience and genial manner have made
him a natural facilitator of ICANN community debates and an
effective ambassador for the multistakeholder model.
Obviously from your reaction there’s not a person here who
hasn’t heard of or had the opportunity to work with Chuck in
some capacity. Personally, I’ve known Chuck for a long time. But
I’ve had the great fortune to benefit from his wisdom and
collegiality during my time on the Registry Stakeholder Group
over the last few years. Chuck has been a mentor to many in this
community including myself, and he is certainly not restricted by
any constituency or stakeholder group boundaries. He is
passionate

in his

advocacy

of the goodness

of the

multistakeholder model and exhibits on a day-to-day basis the
characteristics of a facilitator, collaborator, and consensus
builder.

Page 10 of 19

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

I am very honored to be able to present this award to Chuck on
behalf of the panel and the community. Chuck.

CHUCK GOMES:

Thank you, Donna. As I look out over this great audience and
also look back over the last 18 years, I can’t help but see
hundreds of people who are deserving of this award. So I’m very
humbled and honored to receive it. Any positive contributions
that I have made are not of my own abilities but really come
from the multistakeholder model itself. Because if it hadn’t been
for the help and contributions that all of you and all of those that
are no longer here today have made to what I did, I wouldn’t
have

had

any

success.

It’s

really

a

tribute

to

the

multistakeholder model and to the people who make that.
It’d be disingenuous on my part to take credit for any success
that I may have had because without your help and
contributions in the things I was working on, nothing I did would
have been of any value. I’m not going to try to thank individual
people because there are too many and I’m sure I would forget
some. But I do want to, at least at a high level, say thanks to
those who have contributed to the multistakeholder model and
to any part that I played in that.
I want to first of all thank God for giving me the opportunity to
be a part of this community. I pray every day that my limited

Page 11 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

capacities would be blessed, and without that blessing anything
I’ve done would have failed. I definitely want to thank my wife
Susie, who may be watching on the Internet right now via video,
because without her support and patience – and maybe another
word, tolerance – for the long hours, the weekends and holidays
and vacations, I would have left this a long time ago without her
support. And I want to thank my kids and grandkids because
they’ve had to put up with a lot, too.
And I want to thank the incredible people that I’ve worked with
in a lot of organizations. I have to start with Verisign, because
without Verisign’s support for the multistakeholder model and
for me personally in the policy work that I’ve been involved with,
I could never have done this. It’s been great, the way they have
supported me over the years, and that goes back to Network
Solutions in the late 1990s. I’ve worked with just amazing people
at Verisign and had to rely on their expertise because in a lot of
cases I didn’t have it. And, of course, that means the current
team that I’m working with in Verisign, [such] an incredible,
incredible, team of people.
Secondly, I have to mention the Registry Stakeholder Group.
Donna mentioned that I was the first Chair of that, but just
before I became Chair, Network Solutions was the only member.
Now, it was a lot simpler then. But I’ll tell you what, I wouldn’t
exchange the collaboration that I’ve had with all the great

Page 12 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

people involved in the Registry Stakeholder Group over the
years for that simple situation we had back then.
And of course I have to talk about the GNSO. The Registry
Stakeholder Group is, of course, a part of that and that’s been
where a lot of my focus has been. There have been a lot of
people that have come and gone in the GNSO and a lot that are
still involved today that have been for a long time. What a great
group of people I’ve had the privilege of working with. And it’s
the teamwork in the GNSO – and I know the GNSO a lot of time is
criticized for the way things happen – but without that
teamwork we wouldn’t be where we are today. So I thank all of
those people in the GNSO.
Fortunately, my encounters in the multistakeholder model and
ICANN haven’t been limited to generic top level domains. There
are all kinds of you out there that are part of the other SOs and
ACs, and again, all of you have been such a help to me in the
work that I’ve tried to contribute to.
And then I can’t leave out ICANN staff and the ICANN Board. I’ve
had the privilege over the years of getting to know a lot of them
quite well and that’s been a real joy. And anything that I’ve
contributed to would have been so much harder, maybe
impossible, probably impossible, without the help of ICANN staff
and ICANN directors.

Page 13 of 19

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

In closing, let me say thanks for the award, certainly, but even
more importantly for those of you that made the award possible
because you’re a part of the multistakeholder model. I’ve been
fortunate to work with hundreds of people that are a lot smarter
and capable than I am. And their willingness to contribute to
anything that I tried to do is what makes anything successful
that I’ve been involved with. Sincere thanks to all of you.

DONNA AUSTIN:

Thanks, Chuck. One of the reasons I was selected to do this
presentation is because I was the one person on the panel that
know both of the recipients reasonably well. So I’m equally
pleased to announce that our panel has selected Keith Davidson
as a recipient of the 2016 Multistakeholder Ethos Award.
Keith has been recognized by the panel for his leadership and
contribution to ICANN’s multistakeholder model both within the
ccNSO where he has served as Vice Chair of the ccNSO Council
and co-Chair of the GNSO GAC Liaison Group, and more broadly
across the entire multistakeholder Internet ecosystem. As
Director and Chair of APTLD, the driving force behind the Pacific
IGF, a trustee of the Internet Society, and the President of
Internet NZ.
In his many leadership roles, including Chair of the Delegation of
Redelegation

Page 14 of 19

Working

Group

and

the

Framework

of

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

Interpretation Working Group, Keith has demonstrated a
consensus building commitment to both ICANN and its
multistakeholder processes that is both astonishing and
inspiring.
I’ve known Keith for about 10 years and it’s been a real privilege
to get to know and work alongside Keith in the years since. Most
recently, we worked together on the Meeting Strategy Working
group. So if you love it, it was my idea. If you don’t, it was Keith’s
idea. We come from the same part of the globe and for the most
part speak the same language. Keith has been an integral part of
the New Zealand Internet community that has advocated for an
open Internet and multistakeholder model of governance since
the early days of ICANN.
Keith has worn many hats that stretch beyond ICANN and the
ccNSO and has worked tirelessly in various fora to educate and
enlighten others about the benefits of the multistakeholder
model, a model that Internet NZ lives by.
Keith is a steadying and calming influence and he is more often
than not the voice of reason. Keith was around at the start, and
his successes and guidance are significant reasons why our
model has gained acceptance in global Internet governance
fora.

Page 15 of 19

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

Keith has recently retired. I understand that he delayed that
retirement for about 12 months so he could finish up on some of
the work in the ccNSO. And I know that we will all miss his
steady hand and his easygoing manner. Keith can’t be with us
today but I’m really happy that he has Debbie Monahan to
deputize for him. So please welcome Debbie to the stage on
Keith’s behalf.

DEBBIE MONAHAN:

Excellent. Thank you. Well, I’m aware that Keith will be watching
from home. For once, it’s about 7:00 at night so it’s not
obscenely early or horrible. And Keith, I’d just like to say I’m
privileged that you asked me to do this for you, the man who’s
mentored me so well since I joined this community.
So Keith has actually written a short statement, and for Keith it
is actually quite short, relatively succinct, but I think when you
hear it you’ll know it truly represents him as well.
“I am truly honored and humbled to receive this recognition
from

the

ICANN

community

as

a

recipient

of

the

Multistakeholder Ethos Award. Unfortunately, I cannot be with
you in Helsinki as I’m now mostly retired and no longer active
within ICANN, but I’m grateful for Debbie Monahan stepping in
to receive the award on my behalf. I do hope this new meeting
structure will go well for everyone in Helsinki, and if it doesn’t,

Page 16 of 19

EN

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

feel free to blame me as one of the members of the Meeting
Strategy Working Group who came up with this new format.
“ICANN

is

part

of

the

bold,

global

experiment

in

multistakeholderism. All the tenants and principles behind the
concept are seeking to provide an alternative to multilateral
treaties. And while it can appear that progress can be glacially
slow, our work has been completed at lightning speed by
comparison to the general global treaty processes, and always
remembering that there are seldom one-size-fits-all solutions.
“So there is much at stake in this experiment, and if a successful
Internet governance model is the outcome, the future of
multistakeholderism will surely assist in finding solutions for
other global issues. Massive benefits can accrue from the equal
participation by governments, business, and civil society, in
making consensus decisions.
“Within ICANN, the tasks are relatively narrowly focused on the
management of the Internet’s unique identifiers. Our task
should be confined to developing high-level principles to guide
us in our policy development and to exhaustively go through
iterations to ensure all stakeholders can subscribe to the output
policies. This reiterative process is frustrating, cumbersome, and
often exhausting, but the benefit of having everyone on the
same page is the successful outcome being sought.

Page 17 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

“I don’t think I have done anything more than subscribe to the
process I have outlined, and believe that I have been most
fortunate to work with a fantastically diverse number of people
over the various SO and AC communities who are equally driven
in ensuring the success of the model in these processes.
“The so many people who have put in the countless hours of
volunteer time should all share this award with me, for I have
done nothing more than seek to steer a path of consensus
amongst them. I have been delighted to be able to make some
progress towards ICANN’s goals and am truly humbled and
delighted to receive this award. Please remember that if you
stand for nothing, you’ll fall for anything. So please be principledriven in your future multistakeholder Internet governance
arena. Thank you.”

DONNA AUSTIN:

So if I could ask the other panel members to join us back on
stage, and Chuck if you could come up, too, and we’ll take some
photos. Thanks.

DAVID OLIVE:

Thank you. We’ll be joined by Steve Crocker and our President
Göran Marby.

Page 18 of 19

HELSINKI – Welcome & Multistakeholder Ethos Award Presentation

EN

This concludes our opening session, and we now ask you to join
your regular work sessions and other activities for today and the
rest of the week. Thank you very much.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 19 of 19

