Community Session – Review of All Rights
Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs Policy
Development Process
ICANN56 | 27 June 2016

Goals of this Cross Community Session

Purpose

• To discuss with the community the proposed methodology
and timelines for this Policy Development Process (PDP)
• To obtain the community’s input on data to be collected,
and list of issues to be analyzed, as part of the PDP
• Why this PDP is being conducted in two phases, and how
• What is being covered in Phase One and Phase Two?
• What is the timeline for each Phase?
• What is the community’s view on the scope of topics and
possible data to be gathered for Phase One:

Scope

o Trademark Clearinghouse (TMCH)
o Sunrise registrations through the TMCH
o Claims Notices sent to potential registrants through the
TMCH
o Uniform Rapid Suspension dispute resolution procedure
o Trademark Post-Delegation Dispute Resolution Procedure

| 3

Introduction to the
Rights Protection Mechanisms in All
gTLDs Policy Development Process
(PDP)

What is this PDP Working Group tasked to do?
• March 2016: WG chartered by the GNSO Council to conduct the PDP in two
phases:
o Phase One: review of the RPMs that were developed for the 2012 New gTLD Program
o Phase Two: review of the 1999 Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy

• For each Phase, WG to assess effectiveness of the relevant RPM(s)
• WG work should ultimately also cover:
o the interplay between and complementary roles of each RPM in seeking to more fully
understand their overall functioning and effectiveness.
o the overarching issue as to whether or not all the RPMs collectively fulfill the purposes
for which they were created, or whether additional policy recommendations are needed,
including to clarify and unify policy goals
Note:
“Rights	protection	 mechanisms” (RPMs)	in	this	context	means	those	ICANN	policies	and	processes	that	
are	aimed	at	combatting	cyber-squatting	 and	providing	 workable	mechanisms	for	trademark	owners	to	
either	prevent	or	remedy	certain	illegitimate	uses	of	 their	trademarks	in	the	domain	 name	system	
(DNS)
| 5

What are the RPMs to be reviewed in the two phases of this PDP?
Sunrise Registration Period
and Trademark Claims
Notification Services (Phase
One)
• Sunrise services provide TM
holders with advance opportunity
to register domain names
corresponding to their marks
before names are generally
available to the public
• The Trademark Claims period
follows the Sunrise period and
runs for at least the first 90 days
in which domain names are
generally made available
• TM Claims Notice is sent to a
potential registrant whose
domain matches that of a TM
record in the TMCH
• TM owner is notified if registrant
proceeds

Trademark Clearinghouse (Phase
One)
• A global database of verified trademark
information to support rights protection
processes
• Benefits of inclusion are access to Sunrise
Period and Trademark Claims Service

Trademark Post-Delegation
Dispute Resolution Procedure
(Phase One)
• Allows a TM owner to act directly
against a New gTLD Registry Operator
whose affirmative conduct supports
TM infringement at the top or second
level of its gTLD

Uniform Rapid Suspension
Dispute Resolution
Procedure (Phase One)
• Designed as a complement to
the UDRP, to provide TM owners
with a quick and low-cost
process to suspend domain
names on the same substantive
grounds as the UDRP
• Burden of proof and remedies
are not the same as UDRP

Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy
(UDRP) (Phase Two)
• Created in 1999
• Provides a uniform, standardized alternative
dispute resolution procedure to resolve
disputes concerning who is the rightful holder
of a registered domain name
• Applicable to all domains registered in all
generic top-level domains (gTLDs) – Phase
One RPMs apply only to gTLDs delegated
under the 2012 New gTLD Program round
| 6

Will the RPMs be changed or new ones added as a result of this PDP?
• Conducting a review does not mean there will definitely be new
RPMs or changes to the existing RPMs
o Existing policies and processes will continue to apply unless policy
recommendations to modify, add to or delete them are adopted

• Possible outcomes of a PDP may include:
o Developing new or additional RPMs and/or new or additional
procedures applicable to one or more RPM(s)
o Clarifying, amending or overriding existing RPMs
o Supplementing existing, or developing new, procedural requirements for
existing RPMs;
o Recommending neither substantive nor procedural changes to any
existing RPMs, nor the creation of new RPMs
o Recommending that all RPMs are Consensus Policies applicable to all
gTLDs

| 7

What are the dependencies or other related projects that could affect this PDP?
• The Working Group will coordinate its work (including timelines) with
the following ongoing parallel efforts:
o The GNSO PDP on New gTLD Subsequent Procedures
o The Competition, Consumer Choice & Consumer Trust Review Team
o The independent review of the Trademark Clearinghouse

• The Working Group Charter specifically contemplates community
liason(s) will be appointed between this PDP and that on New gTLD
Subsequent Procedures

| 8

PDP Work Plan and Proposed Methodology

Estimated Timeline for Phase One

Jun 2016

ICANN56

TMPDDRP

Aug 2016

ICANN57

Jan 2017

TMCH

ICANN58
Sunrise, TM
Claims

Apr 2017

ICANN59
URS

Jul 2017

Oct 2017
ICANN60

Jan 2018

PREPARE &
PUBLISH
PHASE ONE
REPORT

BEGIN
PHASE TWO
(UDRP
Review)

Notes:
•

Each RPM is being reviewed consecutively

•

For most RPMs, a Sub Team to perform data collection and initial analysis will be formed (except for the
TM-PDDRP)

•

Initial outreach to all SO/ACs, GNSO Stakeholder Groups & Constituencies began on 28 May 2016
| 10

Community Feedback on Some of the RPMs
being Reviewed in Phase One

1. Reviewing the Trademark Clearinghouse (TMCH)
•

Should further guidance on verification guidelines for different categories of marks be considered?

•

Is the protection of the TMCH too broad? Is the TMCH providing too much protection for those with a
trademark on a generic or descriptive dictionary word? Should TM+50 be reversed?

•

Are legitimate noncommercial, commercial and individual registrants losing legitimate opportunities to
register domain names in New gTLDs?

•

How should the TMCH scope be limited to apply to only the categories of goods and services in which
the generic terms in a trademark are protected?

•

Should the TMCH matching rules be expanded, e.g. to include plurals, ‘marks contained’ or
‘mark+keyword’, and/or common typos of a mark?

•

Should there be an additional or a different recourse mechanism to challenge rejected trademarks?

•

How quickly can a cancelled trademark be removed from the TMCH?

•

How can TMCH services be much more transparent in terms of what is offered pursuant to ICANN
contracts and policies vs. what is offered to private New gTLD registries pursuant to private contracts?

•

Should there be a review on accessibility to TMCH for individuals, private trademark holders and
trademark agents in developing countries?
How can the TMCH provide education services not only for trademark owners, but for the registrants
and potential registrants who are equally impacted by their services?

•

What other questions/topics should the Working Group address?
What feedback do you have on these questions?
| 12

2. Reviewing the Sunrise Registration Period
•

Should the availability of Sunrise registrations only for “identical matches” (e.g. without extra generic
text) be reviewed?

•

Is the notion of ”premium names” relevant to a review of RPMs, and, if so, should it be defined across
all gTLDs? Should there be a mechanism to challenge whether a domain is a ‘premium name’?

•

Should there be a specific policy about the reservation and release of “reserved names” (e.g.
modification of Section 1.3.3 of Specification 1 of the current Registry Agreement)?

•

Should there be a public, centralized list of all reserved trademarks for any given Sunrise period?

•

Should holders of TMCH-verified trademarks be given first refusal once a reserved name is released?

•

Should Sunrise periods continue to be mandatory? If so, should the current requirements apply or
should they be more uniform, such as a 60-day end-date period?

•

Whether and how to develop a mechanism by which trademark owners can challenge Sunrise pricing
practices that flout the purpose of Sunrise

•

Whether more can be done to improve transparency and communication about various Sunrise
procedures

What other questions/topics should the Working Group address?
What feedback do you have on these questions?
| 13

3. Reviewing the Trademark Claims Notification Service
•

Should the Trademark Claims period be extended beyond ninety (90) days?

•

Should the Trademark Claims period continue to apply to all new gTLDs?

•

Should the Abused Domain Name Label service be continued?

•

Does a Trademark Claims period create a potential “chilling effect” on genuine registrations, and, if so,
how should this be addressed?

•

Is the TMCH and the Sunrise Period allowing key domain names to be cherry picked and removed
from New gTLDs unrelated to those of the categories of goods and services of the trademark owner?

•

What is the effect of the 90-day Trademark Claims process?

•

Should notices to the trademark owner be sent before the domain is registered?

What other questions/topics should the Working Group address?
What feedback do you have on these questions?

| 14

4. Reviewing the Uniform Rapid Suspension Procedure (URS)
•

Should the ability for defaulting respondents to file a reply for an extended after the default notice, or
even after a default determination is issued be changed?

•

Is the URS’ ‘clear and convincing’ standard of proof appropriate?

•

Is there a need to develop express provisions to deal with ‘repeat offenders’ as well as a definition of
what qualifies as ‘repeat offences’?

•

Should the URS allow for additional remedies such as a perpetual block or other remedy, e.g. transfer
or a “right of first refusal” to register the domain name in question?

•

Is the current length of suspension (to the balance of the registration period) sufficient?

•

Is the cost allocation model for the URS appropriate and justifiable?

•

Should there be a “loser pays” model? How can that be enforced if the respondent does not respond?

•

Should the Response Fee applicable to complainants listing 15 or more disputed domain names by
the same registrant be eliminated?

•

Has ICANN done its job in training registrants in the new rights and defenses of the URS?

•

Are the expanded defenses of the URS being used and if so, how, when, and by whom?

•

What sanctions should be allowed for misuse of the URS by the trademark owner?

•

What evidence is there of problems with the use of the English-only requirement of the URS,
especially given its application to IDN New gTLDs?

•

How can the appeals process of the URS be expanded and improved?
What other questions/topics should the Working Group address?
What feedback do you have on these questions?

| 15

5. Data Gathering for Phase One
What additional sources besides those below should the Working
Group/ICANN approach to obtain useful data for the work ahead?
Providers:
•
•
•

TMCH – Deloitte (for verification services); CHIP S.A. is contracting party issuing invoices:
http://www.trademark-clearinghouse.com/content/clearinghouse-team
URS – The FORUM; Asian Domain Name Dispute Resolution Center (ADNDRC); MFSD Srl:
https://newgtlds.icann.org/en/applicants/urs
TM-PDDRP – ADNDRC; The FORUM; The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO):
https://newgtlds.icann.org/en/program-status/pddrp

ICANN Compliance and Global Domains Division (GDD)
The TMCH Independent Reviewer: https://newgtlds.icann.org/en/reviews/tmch
Also, join the Working Group’s meeting on Thursday to discuss the
Providers’ feedback on the TM-PDDRP:
https://icann562016.sched.org/event/7Gl1/gnso-review-of-all-rights-protection-mechanismsrpms-in-all-gtlds-pdp-working-group?iframe=yes&w=i:100;&sidebar=yes&bg=no
| 16

To Learn More about this PDP and the
Working Group

Further Information

• GNSO	Activity	Page	(with	background	 information,	 relevant	GNSO	Council	
Resolutions,	 and	the	PDP	Issue	Reports):	http://gnso.icann.org/en/groupactivities/active/rpm
• The	Working	 Group	 Charter	(describing	 the	two-phased	PDP	and	the	scope	of	
work):	https://community.icann.org/x/2CWAAw
• The	Working	 Group’s	 online	 collaborative	wiki	space	(containing	 agendas,	
transcripts	and	recordings	 of	all	Working	 Group	 meetings;	draft	documents;	and	
background	 material):	https://community.icann.org/x/wCWAAw

| 18

