HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 16:30 to 18:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

PHIL CORWIN:

Okay. Good afternoon. Day one of meeting B is almost over, but
we've saved the best for last, of course. This is the crosscommunity working group discussion to bring everyone in the
community up to date on our new working group which is
chartered to review all rights protection mechanisms and all
Generic Top Level Domains, both the new TLDs and the legacy
TLDs.

With some overlap in the RPMs and some that are

exclusive to the new TLDs. Let me mention before we get to the
first slide and talk about the purpose and scope of this working
group, after we do the presentation -- and I'm here -- let me
mention, I'm Philip Corwin. I'm a GNSO councillor representing
the business constituency. I'm joined at the table by J. Scott
Evans who's a trademark counsel at Adobe and a long-time
member of ICANN, immediately past president of the
International Trademark Association and also a member of the
business constituency. And by Kathy Kleiman. And both J. Scott
and Kathy had a hand in designing the UDRP.

They have

experience going back further than mine. And Kathy is a private
practitioner, practicing in Northern Virginia and the Washington,

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

DC area, and a member of the noncommercial users
constituency. So we have hopefully -- and we've had very good
cooperation and harmony within the co-chairs and this working
group so far.
After we do presentations there's five roaming microphones.
We're going to take your input. This session is not for debating
what the outcome of our PDP should be. This is to inform you on
what we're doing, to get some -- if you think there are questions
that aren't listed yet or data you want to present, bring that up.
And we have another session of the actual working group on
Thursday morning, starting bright and early at 8:00 a.m., and
that session is our first topic that this working group is looking to
which is the post delegation dispute resolution process the
PDDRP, for those of you collecting ICANN acronyms. If you don't
know that one, you can jot it down.
So what is the purpose of the -- of this session? We're going to
discuss the methodology and timelines for this PDP. We're going
to obtain the community's input on the data that should be
collected and the issues we're going to be analyzing and
whether we've -- already have all the questions we should be
asking. Are there others that are missing as of now. Why we're
conducting this in two phases. The first phase is to review the
RPMs created for the new TLD program, and the second phase,
which will be starting, as you see, in early 2018, we have a multi-

Page 2 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

year timeline here, will be the first-ever review of the UDRP. The
only ICANN consensus policy that's never undergone review.
And we'll give you timelines on that and we're going to take your
view on the scope of topics and the data to be gathered. And
phase one is our main focus today, and the topics in phase one
are the trademark clearinghouse, sunrise registrations which
trademark owners get if they have marks they've registered in
the clearinghouse. Claims notices which are sent to potential
registrants of domains that match marks in the trademark
clearinghouse and the trademark owner is also notified if those
registrations go to completion. The Uniform Rapid Suspension,
the URS, and the PDDRP which I just mentioned. And now I'm -oh, I think I'm still going here. Next slide, please.
Go to the next one. What is the PD -- yes, that's the one. Yeah.
This is a relatively new working group. We just kicked off our
activities in March of this year. And again, we're going to be two
phases. New TLD RPMs phase one. UDRP phase two. In each
phase we're going to gauge, based on the objective data that's
available, the effectiveness of the rights protection mechanisms.
We're ultimately also going to cover the interplay and the
complimentary roles that these RPMs play too, and we're going
to fully understand their functioning and effectiveness. And the
overarching issue for this working group is whether or not the
RPMs collectively fulfill the purposes for which they were

Page 3 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

created or whether additional policy recommendations are
needed, including to clarify and unify policy goals. Also, we're
always going to be considering whether the processes provide
adequate, substantive, and procedural due process to all the
parties that are involved.
So who's taking this next one? Handing off to my co-chair Kathy
Kleiman who will continue the decision.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Hi, everyone. I'm Kathy Kleiman, and I run the internet law and
policy practice of Fletcher, Heald & Hildreth in the Washington,
DC area.

That's the oldest telecommunications firm in the

United States.
And I'm very pleased to be here with my co-chairs, J. Scott Evans
and Phil Corwin, and we're beginning a long process. We're still
at the very beginning of a long process with this working group,
and we're glad you're here to help us with our first public input.
I want to do something that we did in the last working group. I
want to ask who's members, who's observers, who's guests. So
if you're a member of the working group, could you raise your
hand. Outstanding. If you're an observer of the working group,
which I'll just let people know, if you don't know, a member
actively participates, comes to the meetings. Observers follow

Page 4 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

on the list what we're doing and have the opportunity to
become active members if they'd like. So if you're an observer
of the working group, could you raise your hand. Great. Thank
you. And if you're a guest, coming and listening to us. Terrific.
We really appreciate your being here. And I'm going to ask one
more question which we certainly didn't ask in the last working
group which was on a totally different subject. If you had a hand
in creating any of the rights protection mechanisms that is we're
going to discuss today, which include the trademark
clearinghouse, the Uniform Rapid Suspension, the UDRP, the
Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy, could you raise your hand.
Great. Great. Big smiles as people take credit for having created
things that are now -- that now exist in a lot of ways we created
from whole cloth, sometimes 15 years ago with the UDRP.
Okay. So it's my pleasure to take us through these slides which
are the rights protection mechanisms that we're reviewing. And
in a bit of a counterintuitive process, but one that's been
thoroughly discussed and agreed to, we're going to do the
oldest policy last. So we're going to do the Uniform Dispute
Resolution Policy in phase two. So we're not dealing with the
UDRP here.
What we are dealing with is the new rights protection
mechanisms created for the new gTLDs. There was a sense in
the ICANN community that we were facing a new set of

Page 5 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

challenges with the new gTLDs, especially rolling out many
gTLDs at the same time, and that we needed a special set of
mechanisms to work with that process. And so that's where the
-- the boxes on the left come up. I'm going to start with the
orange box, the trademark clearinghouse. And just as people
know, but many people might not, that this is a global database
of verified trademark information and it supports trademark
rights and it's used for some of the other processes that we're
going to discuss. So if you have a registered federal mark or
court validated mark, you can put it in the trademark
clearinghouse and it will be used for the new gTLDs, for different
processes.
I'm going to the blue box next because this is two of the
processes that use the marks in the trademark clearinghouse.
The first is the sunrise registration period. And sunrise services
provide trademark holders whose trademarks are in the
trademark clearinghouse with advanced opportunity to register
their domain names corresponding to their marks before the
domain names are available to the public. So that's the sunrise
period.
The second trademark claims use that we discuss is the
trademark claims. You'll sometimes see it as TM claims. The
trademark claims notification services.

Page 6 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

So the trademark claims period follows the sunrise period and
runs for at least the first 90 days in which domain names in the
new gTLDs are available to the general public. A trademark
claims notice is sent to a potential registrant whose domain
matches that of the trademark record in the trademark
clearinghouse. And the registrant then has the chance to decide
whether, after reading the notice, they want to go forward with
the registration of the domain name or whether they don't. And
if the registrant goes forward and registers the domain name,
then the trademark owner is notified at the address they've
given to the trademark cleaning house at the email address.
And I notice Paul McGrady is here, and he and I drafted the
trademark claims notice a number of years ago.
And so now moving to the yellow box. So let's say a domain
name goes in and you feel it is an infringement of your
trademark. Then you can use either the UDRP which, of course,
exists, the Uniform Dispute Resolution Policy, or this new policy,
the Uniform Rapid Suspension Dispute Resolution Procedure.
This is and was designed as a complement to the UDRP and it
provides trademark owners an even quicker and lower cost
mechanism for suspending the domain name. On basically the
same substantive grounds as the UDRP. The burden of proof
and the remedies are not the same as the UDRP. You can't
transfer domain name and the burden of proof is higher because

Page 7 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

this was designed as a really -- a really fast abuse mechanism. If
it's really, really clear-cut abuse, and that was the term we used
when we were drafting it, clear-cut abuse, use the URS. If there
are -- if it's more complicated than that, the UDRP is probably
the place to go. Or at least that was the reasoning as we created
these mechanisms.
So moving on to the gray box, which is the trademark postdelegation dispute resolution procedure, this one is really
interesting because it's never been used. This is a challenge to
the top-level domain itself by a trademark owner who can -- who
asserts that the registry operator is affirmatively engaged in
trademark infringement at the top or second-level domain of the
gTLD.
We are currently exploring this. We invite you to join us on
Thursday morning where we will be talking about this in greater
detail.
We're starting -- of all of these new gTLD RPMs, we're starting
with the trademark PDDRP.
And then Number 5 is the one we have lived with for so many
years, uniform dispute resolution policy. I see Brian Beckham
here with us from the World Intellectual Property Organization.
Brian, do you want to wave?

Page 8 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

He runs this dispute policy. This was created in 1999. It provides
an

uniform

standardized

alternative

dispute

resolution

procedure to resolve disputes concerning to resolve disputes
concerning who is the rightful owner of a registered domain
name.
This is applicable to all top-level domains. This is both legacy,
.COM, .ORG, .NET, .JOBS as well as the new gTLDs. And, again,
we will be getting to the UDRP in phase 2, but right now we're
talking about phase 1.
So let me hand this over to J. Scott to talk about this phase that
we're in.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

So we decided to start with the PDDRP because it hadn't been
used and we thought it was a good way for us warm into the
work, is to start with this particular process.
And so we have already begun this process during our
conference calls. We've had several calls.
One of the first things we did was we had a presentation by staff
on what exactly the mechanism is and what the burdens of proof
are and what you have to do to show to be successful. Since we
have no cases, we just basically went through the policy and
discussed it because we have a lot of people who are

Page 9 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

participating. We have, like, I think, about 120 or so active
participants. And some of them have never been involved in a
working group, and some of them have never used or utilized
any of these mechanisms. So we want to make sure that they
understand what they are as we discuss them.
We also then brought in some providers that actually have set
up the infrastructure to run these mechanisms in the event
anyone should ever bring a claim. So we had someone from, I
believe it was, the National Arbitration Forum. We had someone
from -- well, WIPO submitted written responses. And then, I
think, the Asian dispute resolution folks out of Asia, Hong Kong,
they also provided written responses which we went over with
the group.
And we had certain questions that were in our charter, but that's
a non-exclusive list of questions.
So if there's anyone on the working group or during this session
today or during our session on Thursday that thinks we should
be considering something else, if there's some sort of data that
we should pay attention to or know about, we invite you to let us
know because we want to be as inclusive as we can as we have
these discussions.
One of the things you need -- the issues that we're going to be
grappling with, so you know what we're dealing with -- and this

Page 10 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

is will be for the PDDRP, but it will also be for all the other
mechanisms as well -- is, you know -- is this mechanism -- this
applies to all of them. Is the mechanism we might be discussing
serving the purpose for which it was designed?

That's a

question we're going to consider with all of them.
If it is, fine. If it isn't, does it need to be changed in some way,
either fundamentally on a substantive level or procedurally or
some way that would make it more effective? And, if so, what
those would be?

And we would recommend that to the

community. That would be an outcome.
Or should it not apply at all? Should we just get rid of it because
it's not serving its purpose?

Should there be something

different, totally different, that takes care of the purpose?
And then lastly, should it also be applicable on some of these to
legacy gTLDs as well, not just on the TLDs that were created in
the first round?
So those are the things and the issues that we're going to be
looking at with regards to this policy.
So we invite you to -- you know, let us hear from you so we
know.
We would love to hear from you, you know, during the sessions
and our face-to-face meetings, but you will also have an

Page 11 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

opportunity, once we make our decision, we will be presenting it
to the public, our recommendations, and you have a chance to
file comment on that and give us feedback on that and we will
adjust accordingly, if we believe that we get input that needs to
be adjusted to, and then our final report will have taken that in
and will come out.
So I -- you should know that we're going to have to -- because
this group is handling various mechanisms, there are other
groups that are currently looking at things within the ICANN
community within the new gTLD process that are going on right
now that we're coordinating with.
We've created liaisons to work with those other working groups
and you see up on the screen here we're working and
coordinating with the new gTLD subsequent procedures group.
We're also working with the competition, consumer choice, and
consumer trust working group. And then there is a specific
independent review going on specific to the trademark
clearinghouse that we will be coordinating with as well.
So we are trying to work with all of these groups. We've created
liaisons that can let us know where they are in their work, they
can stay abreast of where we are in our work, so that we can
coordinate and make sure that we're all going forward in a
coordinated fashion.

Page 12 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

So now let me quickly take you through -- go up a couple of
slides to our estimated time line, so you know.
Welcome to ICANN! Nothing's going to happen quickly!
It's going to be about a two-year process. We're going to take
the first year to go through all the new gTLD mechanisms, and
you can see up here a rough time line of where everything is
going to fall.
But you can see that we probably -- we don't at this point see
ourselves getting to the UDRP until the beginning of 2018. And
that's just because we have so many other mechanisms to go
through.
And of course this is like everyone -- everything else. This is our
plan. So it could accelerate or it could decelerate. So far, we're
making very good progress and things have been moving on at a
pretty good clip. I don't think we've had any substantial waylays
or delays that we think have derailed us at this point but we've
only been rocking along since probably March. So -- but just to
let you know, that's where we are.
We have conference calls every week for an hour, and we've had
very vibrant discussions, both in the chat and on line. They only
last an hour. And we do rotate our calls in different time frames
so that we can hopefully get those in Europe and those in Asia to

Page 13 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

participate with us as well and not always have to be up in the
middle of the night. We try to rotate that to be fundamentally
fair to our committee members that are outside of the North
American time zone.
So there's our time line. I think it's pretty clear. I think these
slides will be available, won't they, on the Web site?
So I'm going to turn it over to Phil so he can talk about the
community input.

PHILIP CORWIN:

Okay.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

Oh, I'm sorry. Kathy. I can't see the "K" at the top.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Okay. So now we're going to talk about the type of community
feedback, the type of input we're looking for, on the rights
protection mechanisms that we're reviewing in Phase 1.
Next slide, please.
So I am not going to read all these questions, but the first thing
that we're doing is reviewing the trademark clearinghouse, and
so what we're looking for here, what we're looking for from our

Page 14 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

members, what we're looking for from the public is: What are
your questions about the trademark clearinghouse?
And not only what are your questions, what are your issues,
what are your concerns, what are your experiences, but also -and it's really a separate type of question -- what type of data
would you like us to gather from the trademark clearinghouse?
What should we be looking at? What should we be asking them
in order to help us with the evaluation ahead?
What should we be trying to collect?
So I'll read a few of our questions and then we're actually going
to open the microphones, and we'll talk about that process in a
second.
So I'll just read a few of them, not all of them, to kind of spark
the thinking about the trademark clearinghouse.
So, should further guidance on verification guidelines exist for
different categories of marks? Should different categories of
marks be considered?
Right now, the trademark clearinghouse registers the category
of goods and services, but the sunrise period protects it
regardless of the category of goods and services in which a new
gTLD may fall.

Page 15 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

Is the protection of the trademark clearinghouse too broad? Is
the trademark clearinghouse providing too much protection for
those with a trademark on a generic or descriptive dictionary
word? Should trademark plus 50 be reversed?
And then the third one, are legitimate noncommercial,
commercial, and individual registrants losing legitimate
opportunities to register domain names in new gTLDs?
This is some of the questions of the trademark clearinghouse. I
know people have a lot more. So we're going to open up the
microphones.
Mary, are the individual mics shut off on the desks or are those
on for this session?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Okay. We're just using the roving microphones, and what you do
is you raise your hand.

There are different zones that the

microphones will be in. We'll start with Zone 1, which is over
here (indicating), so if you're in Zone 1 and you have a question,
raise your hand.

Page 16 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

So again, questions for the trademark clearinghouse, data we
might want to gather.
Zone 2 is fine, too.

VIDUSHI MARDA:

Thank you. I'm Vidushi Marda from the Center for Internet and
Society.
I wanted to bring up the issue of looking at whether the
trademark clearinghouse effectively balances the rights of rights
holders versus normal Internet users and whether the trademark
clearinghouse creates a tendency to perpetuate the status quo
or does it give us avenues that are procedurally and
substantively fair so as to balance the rights of rights holders
and Internet users?
We've begun looking at it through our work with the CCWP HR,
which is the cross-community working party on human rights,
where we created initial scoping on particular cases in which
these issues have arisen, and I think it would be interesting to
build on that work and maybe have a database of -- that -- a
more exhaustive database to look into this issue. Thank you.

Page 17 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

EN

So before you give up the microphone, what would you need for
that more exhaustive database? What type of data are you
interested in or do you think we should be interested in?

VIDUSHI MARDA:

I think data, for example, looking at how many cases have
helped existing rights holders, how many cases have helped
Internet users that do not own the rights at the time that they
come to the trademark clearinghouse.
I also think questions of procedure. For example, has procedure
been followed correctly in all cases. In the case of deviations,
why were the deviations caused, who were the deviations
helping.
I think it would be interesting to look at that, because we found
it hard to find that data and to actually map it out, so I think that
would be interesting to look into. Thank you.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Thank you. Number 5, please.

LEON SANCHEZ:

Hi. My name is Leon Sanchez and I'm particularly keen of -- of
the question on reviewing accessibility for trademark agents in

Page 18 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

developing countries. That's something that definitely should
happen.
But I also would like to question whether the trademark
clearinghouse should remain a single provider or should we
open it to different providers, of course with a central database
that should be accessed by the different providers, because I
think that opening to new players in the market would also, of
course, foster competition and that would lower the barriers of
access for different players, especially in developing countries.
So my question would be: Should we consider opening the
trademark clearinghouse to more players that could provide the
service?

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

That's a very good question. We'll definitely take that under
advisement. Thank you.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

But I do want to point out that there is an independent review of
the -- of the -- that is probably a better issue for them.
I mean, it's certainly something we can note, but what we're -what we're trying to figure out is if the -- if -- if the -- if the
mechanism itself works. We're not really going to delve in too

Page 19 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

deeply into questions like that one, but I do think we can note it
and in our coordination we can let that group know that this
isn't the first time it's been brought up. It actually was brought
up on our call in a chat. Like, one of the first two or three calls
we had, that was one of the questions that was asked by one of
the participants.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

So J. Scott, are you suggesting that maybe this comment be
taken directly to the subsequent procedures working group?

J. SCOTT EVANS:

To the Trade- -- independent review on the trademark
clearinghouse --

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Okay.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

-- which is happening and we'll take that forward.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

And I would suggest also the subsequent --

Page 20 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

J. SCOTT EVANS:

Yes.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

-- procedures working group --

J. SCOTT EVANS:

Yes.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

-- which may be looking at that as well.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

Okay.

LEON SANCHEZ:

Can I have a quick follow-up?

EN

The reason for this question to be raised is because I believe that
the trademark clearinghouse has failed in its objective to
address the needs of the developing countries and, therefore,
the question.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Page 21 of 50

Thank you for the clarification.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

J. SCOTT EVANS:

Remote question?

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Number 2?

J. SCOTT EVANS:

We've got a remote question.

REMOTE INTERVENTION:

This is David Tait, the remote participation manager, and we've
got some questions from the AC room.
First of all, George Kirikos just wanted to point out that some of
the data elements that were discussed in the first question have
already been collected by the working group.
We then had a question from Jody Kolker:

Is there data

available for the trademark holder who has recovered a domain
that was registered by a user that did not win the trademark?
And that's it at the moment.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

You know, I'm not -- I'm not sure I'm understanding the
question, but I don't know if that's data that we know if it's
available. I mean, I'm certain that there's data that can tell you
how many sunrise registrations were sought and obtained and

Page 22 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

how many trademark claims have issued, and there may even be
data that tells us how many claims were issued and then how
many proceeded on to registration after a claims notice was
received, but I don't know if we have data of that nature because
it's so specific to one case, and the trademark clearinghouse
itself is not an adjudicatory body.

It merely sends out

notifications and then you qualify for certain protections that
are run by the registries themselves, not by the trademark
clearinghouse.
So I'm not so sure where we would find that data, but we'll have
that note in our transcript and we'll take a look and see if we can
parse out -If you'd like to send a better formulation of your question to the
list so we just make sure that we understood you correctly, that
would be very helpful. I think it was Jody? Jody.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Go ahead.

MATHIEU WEILL:

My name is Mathieu Weill. I'm at AfNIC, the ccTLD manager for
.FR, and we're also a registry service provider for several gTLDs.

Page 23 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

First of all, thank you to you all members, and especially the cochairs, for taking on this outstanding work. This is extremely
helpful and I appreciate the approach based on facts and data
that you're obviously promoting for that review.
My question, the one I'm not seeing in this list on the trademark
clearinghouse, is whether you are going to include in your scope
the cost/benefit ratio of the trademark clearinghouse.
Part of the efficiency analysis is to assess whether the benefits
are consistent with the expected benefits of the policy for the
various stakeholders, but also at some point I think it's essential
that we raise the question whether the costs for rights holders,
for ICANN, for the community are -- are proportionate to this
benefit.
And I think I would hope that this could be added in the scope of
that review, because to me this is an absolutely essential
question. Thank you.

PHILIP CORWIN:

Yeah. Mathieu, that's an excellent question and it's going to be a
difficult one to get the data, I think, because -Well, in some cases, you know, the two principal benefits of the
clearinghouse for the trademark owner is, one, the ability to do
a sunrise registration to protect their mark, which the

Page 24 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

prerequisite is that you've registered the mark in the
clearinghouse, but we know that there are complaints about the
pricing by some registries of those sunrise registrations and
allegations that the clearinghouse registration is actually being
used as a -- a very aggressive pricing mechanism by some
registries.
So there's that discontent.
On the other hand, the other benefit is the claims notice, and the
benefit there would be to -- to -- when the -- when the potential
registrant gets the claims notice, if they intend to infringe, are
they basically deterred by the receipt of the claims notice? But I
know that at the last meeting in Marrakech, there was a
presentation by the group conducting this independent study of
the clearinghouse and I asked specifically, "Will you be able to
generate any data relating to either the number of infringing
attempts to register that were deterred by receipt of the claims
notice versus the number of legitimate registration attempts
that were deterred where they wouldn't have had a valid claim
against them in a URS or UDRP but the registrant simply was
scared off by receipt of the claims notice?"
And the response in both cases from the people conducting the
study was, no, we won't be able to generate that data. So in
regard to the benefits, we know what the mechanisms are but

Page 25 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

it's going to -- we're not going to evaluate whether the results
are satisfactory for both trademark owners and registrants.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

I do want to say one thing, though. In our discussions, I think we
have to do some mental parsing here and remember that the
trademark clearinghouse is not a rights protection mechanism.
It is a database that contains information that is then used in
two rights protection mechanisms: The claims notice and the
sunrise.
So when we start talking about cost benefit, there are two costbenefit analyses. One is having a central repository of this
information. Is it effective? Is it efficient? Should there be more
than one provider that has the ability to do that?

Is that

affecting price? There's that.
But then there's the question of once you use that information -and that's the reason we are also going to look at those
mechanisms themselves separately, the claims notice and the
sunrise position. But we -- they get sort of all subsumed into one
when we have these discussions. But they are actually separate
things. And when we look at them, we need to keep them
separate in our minds because what we're dealing with are
different in the problem we're trying to solve.

Page 26 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

One is -- cuts off people, right, to get a domain name because
you either get a sunrise and you block someone or you get a
claims notice and you may deter someone from going forward.
And the other is just -- in my office, saves a paralegal from
having to put 15 registrations -- because everyone's going to
offer a sunrise to all the separate registries separately because
that's what we did in 2008 and that was a mess, right? Because
everybody had different requirements.

Some people you

couldn't staple it. Some people you had to have a certified copy.
And so I think we have to realize that when we talk about this,
we have to talk about two things. One is the collection of the
data and how that data is maintained and whether it should be
more than one person. And is that effective and efficient?
And the other is: Then when it's put to use, is that effective and
efficient?

And those mechanisms, those two separate

mechanisms.
I think we had a follow-up from our AFNIC.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Quick follow-up is assessing the costs for each of the parties is
central. Of course, the benefits we can always discuss but the
costs are available. They should be disclosed for each of the
stakeholders because that is part of the evaluation of early
mechanism. And I would hope this is brought forward on the

Page 27 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

other topics. It is important that we evaluate whether -- we take
that into account when we assess a policy, the cost of a policy.
Thank you.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Mathieu, just following up briefly, benefits and costs can be
interpreted many different ways. And the costs can be both
economic and different types of -- other types of costs as well.
One we talked about was chilling effects.

Through the

trademark notice perhaps, somebody might be chilled.
To the extent you can provide us some guidance based on being
deeply involved in some of these processes on what the costs
would be and how to define them, we'd appreciate that, what
we should be looking for in terms of cost. Now or later.

MATHIEU WEILL:

Well, what I would be looking at -- first of all, by looking at the
TMCH operator and how it's funded, by whom, what amount,
what's the unit price, what's the volume. And that's the big -that's the number one step on the cost that, I think, needs to be
part of the evaluation. Thank you.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Page 28 of 50

Thank you.

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

Further questions on TMCH? I see one from Paul McGrady. I'm
sorry. You have been waiting a long time. Thank you.

ANNE AIKMAN-SCALESE:

Thank you. It's Anne Aikman-Scalese again from the IPC, and so
I will add might bias as a trademark attorney. I actually wanted
to make a positive comment regarding the I.P. claims notice. I
think it's been very effective for our clients.
And I believe that the trademark clearinghouse has operated in
quite an efficient manner. I especially want to commend Vicky
Folens. I don't know if she's at the meeting. But they're quite
responsive.
And I feel that with respect to the cost assessment that Mathieu
was referring to, we also need to look at the cost to the
community if, for example, the rights protection mechanism
were not in place. I think J. Scott alluded to this a little bit in
talking about what would happen if there were no I.P. claims
notice, there would be a cost assessment to in particular the
business community. And that should also be assessed in any
sort of cost assessment, even if it's not a direct cost to
contracted parties.
And a question I also have is in terms of evaluating the
trademark clearinghouse and its effectiveness and the rights

Page 29 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

protection mechanisms that are associated with that, it's my
recollection of the history of the development of these rights
protection mechanisms is that they were developed as a basket
and as a grouping and they were not developed independently
so that in the consensus that was ultimately reached by the
community, it was viewed that each of the elements had a part
to play.
So as you evaluate each piece independently, I'm curious as to
whether the group has a mechanism for treating them again as a
group of RPMs, as a unit. Thank you.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

I think that's certainly a question that we will ask ourselves.
Because what -- our remit is to decide whether things need to
exist, whether they don't need to exist. And I think what you're
trying to say is that they were put together -- I think the term at
the time was a tapestry of protections. And so they all fit
together as this tapestry. If you removed one, then the tapestry
wouldn't be complete.
So we will probably -- I would assume, we will be asking
ourselves that question if we should recommend that something
should be removed or deleted as a protection.
I think Paul had a question.

Page 30 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Right.

EN

Let's have one more question -- Are there multiple

questions out there? So let's close the queue, and then we'll
move to the sunrise registration period after Paul.

PAUL McGRADY:

I'm very disappointed because I wanted to say the word
"tapestry" first. So that was a big disappointment today.
I think one of the real -- and this -- I would like for everybody in
this room to think about how we solve this problem, because I
think this is a -- this is the thorniest problem because how do we
parse out what was a bad chill and what was a good chill, right?
Because it's not necessarily bad for somebody to see a brilliantly
drafted claims notice, right, and say, "Oh, yeah, wow, I shouldn't
do that," right? That's not a good idea. Versus somebody who
feels like, well, maybe they -- maybe they just abandoned some
really good idea that would have been distinguishable from the
trademark land, right?
Without actually going through and deducing as a group -because trying to put ourselves inside that person's head -- does
that make sense? I think that's a real issue that we are going to
have to struggle with. So if there are any macropsychologists in
the room or whatever that have any thoughts, I think we would

Page 31 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

love to hear about that because that to me is tricky, right?
Thank you.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Absolutely.

It's very tricky.

Although, based on some

preliminary data we've seen, a lot of people are turning back. A
lot of people aren't going through with registrations. It's in the
millions, we think. We'll get the data. We'll evaluate it. But it's a
really good question. And, of course, one of the problems we are
trying to avoid was the chilling effect. That's why we drafted so
carefully.
So did we draft brilliantly? Should there be other things in the
notice? Do people understand what their rights are versus what
they're being shown? Do we need more languages? So I think
we should be looking. It's a really good point that you're raising,
and it's going to be complicated. And we hope people will help
us with this, especially --

PHILIP CORWIN:

And just to add to that, obviously on the corporate side, the
registrants who have marks in the clearinghouse generally have
very good trademark counsel taking care of that or outside law
firms, people who understand trademark law. Then there are
professional domain investors who understand and don't want

Page 32 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

to violate trademark and generally have good trademark
counsel to advise them.
But then there's a great mass of domain registrants, and there
may be individuals who want to register a generic word at some
new TLD that's trademark for something entirely different than
what they're intending to use it for.
But they get that claims notice and they go, "Well, I don't want
to get in trouble. And I just wanted to do a $20 registration, not
spend $500 to consult with a trademark lawyer." And they may
abandon what might be a legitimate registration. We have to
balance all of this somehow.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

All right. I am just going to -- need to go back one slide. I'm just
going to show you the questions that we're considering with
regards to the sunrise registration period. And for those of you
that don't know what a sunrise registration is because I do see
on our poll that we had some beginners in the room, that is a
preregistration that is offered to a trademark owner who is -- has
a mark that is registered in the trademark clearinghouse that
they have shown that they are using, okay?

And they get

preferential. They get it before the registry goes live. So they get
a preregistration. It's usually sold at a premium price.

Page 33 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

And so these are some of the issues that we are considering. But
as I've said before, these are non-exclusive. So I'd like now to
open it up to the group because we're running on time. I'm not
going to read through these. They are there for you.
But does anyone have some information or things that they
think we should consider with regards to the sunrise registration
process?

And we have the roving mics.

opportunity.

And this is your

Again, we're going to meeting on Thursday

morning. But on Thursday morning we will be focusing on the
PDDRP. So this is the time for you to give us information with
regards to the sunrise process.
Anybody have any comment, concerns, things you think we
need to pay attention to? We got that one right apparently.
I'm now going to turn this to Kathy who's going to talk about the
claims.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Okay. So back to me. The trademark claims notification which
we've already touched on under the trademark clearinghouse -if people want to keep talking about the trademark
clearinghouse, raise your hand. We will continue on that as well.
So this is the trademark claims period where a registrant for a
new gTLD during general availability will be notified about the

Page 34 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

mark in the trademark claims notice is now mandated at 90
days.
Should the trademark claims period be extended beyond 90
days? Should the trademark claims period apply -- to continue
to apply to all new gTLDs? Should we extend it to the next round
or rounds of new gTLDs or propose it be extended?
Should the abused domain name label service be continued?
And then something we touched on earlier: Does a trademark
claims period create a potential chilling effect on genuine
registrations? And, if so, how should this be addressed?
That's a sample of some of the questions. Perhaps you've got
more or experience with the trademark claims, concerns about
it, things you would like us to know about it.
Anybody want to comment on the trademark claims period?
Some of the registries here, anyone want to comment on your
experiences with it?
Good. Go ahead.

RUBENS KUHL:

Rubens Kuhl, .BR. I wish to convey one thing that was brought
to us by registrars, which is not a policy issue.

Page 35 of 50

It's an

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

implementation issue of trademark claims. It currently has a
very limited, very low validity period, so -- like a few days.
So that actually prevents some of the marketing activities that
usually are performed by registrars, like selling preregistrations
which can't be done if the window -- validity of the claims period
is just too low.

So actually claims is currently a pain for

contracted parties due to its implementation.
There was nothing in the policy that would create this, and this
was just created by ICANN staff, and it hurt us all.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Thank you very much. That's an important comment. Thank
you.
Werner.

WERNER STAUB:

Thank you. Werner Staub from CORE. I would like to echo what
Rubens just said. Actually, we have a whole list of things that
need -- not just should, needs to be improved and generally
simplified in the sunrise trademark claims and sunrise process.
It is so difficult to use that people mostly just give up. And, you
know, that's not a good -- that's not a good way of offering a
solution if it's just too complicated.

Page 36 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

The sunrise processes for the registries did -- the way it was
done was too hard to do. People just tried to go a past it and
then the real action is just after that.
And the registries with respect to the trademark claims -- even
though we would have liked to offer the solutions to the affected
parties, we would like to make an effort for them, it's so difficult
to use they just say, "Let's just give up." They'll say the details is
probably -- it's not the discussion here, but that's just what
Rubens suggests as one of those examples. There's many more.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

I hope you share some of the details with the working group so
we can work on this further.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

Yeah, I mean, I think that demonstrates to us that we need to
bring in some registrars and registries to our call and have a
discussion with them, a frank discussion with them, about what
they've seen in implementation of it and where they think it's
been difficult for them.

I think that we owe that to the

community and to ourselves to do that.
So, Werner, I want to thank you very much for bringing that
forward because I certainly hadn't been thinking of the difficulty
on an implemented registry or registrar. I'm more thinking

Page 37 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

about the effects on either a trademark owner or a user who
couldn't get a name rather than thinking on that. And I think it's
good that if we explore those issues.
So I would like us to be able to reach out to you and see if we
could set up when we get to talking about that and have that as
one of our data points that we bring in is to talk not just about
the statistics with how things have been used but also look at
the implementation and whether some changes should be made
that would make it a more effective solution for everyone.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Jordyn Buchanan.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Thanks. It's Jordyn Buchanan with Google. So I have two
related comments. We'll see if they actually come together, or
questions.
The first one, just to build on the points that were just recently
made about, actually, engaging registries and registrars, I think
that's useful not only to understand the sort of costs and
burdens on those entities but also in this discussion of chilling
effects earlier, thing you could talk to registrars and maybe even
like track down users who have been -- who have seen the
notices and ask them what was their reaction to it. We don't

Page 38 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

have to guess. We don't have to hire a psychologist to say what
might a person think, because these notices have actually been
displayed to actual people. So you can, ideally speaking, try to
figure out who those people are and ask them their reaction to
it.

That seems like a much more valuable way to try to

understand the reaction than to just sort of speculate about how
to interpret other sorts of data other than just talking to -- like,
other than getting that directly.
And the related point I was going to make is I think in general
what you're hearing from the previous speakers from the
registry and registrar side, and this is reflected in some of the
questions on both the sunrise as well as claims, is it seems like at
times registries and registrars are trying to avoid implementing
these mechanisms. You know, many registrars just decided not
to offer claims. They would wait until 90 days into a registry's
launch period and then they would start offering that particular
TLD because it was too complicated to implement.
Some of the questions in sunrise about, like, reserved lists and
so on I think also reflect maybe not complexity but costs to the
registries that they're trying to mitigate through the use of
reserved lists.
So I think one thing you may want to take into account, going
back do Mathieu's comment about costs and benefits is are

Page 39 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

these so burdensome at times to the people that are
implementing it that they're looking for ways to sort of make
their businesses still work by sort of working around them. And
if so, then maybe there's a way to reform them to get at the
same goals or the same results without necessarily carrying the
same costs, and then you might actually find better sort of
consistency across all operators with how they're actually
implemented if there wasn't this incentive to sort of work
around them.

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

Thank you for your comments, Jordan. I'll echo J. Scott's earlier
comment that it sounds like we should be reaching out to
registrars and registries and potentially through you to
registrants to be asking some of these questions about
implementation and effect.
Thank you.

PHILIP CORWIN:

Okay. And now we're going to move on to the final RPM that's
going to be reviewed in phase one of our working's proceedings
which is uniform rapid suspension.
Why does uniform rapid suspension exist? It exists because at
the time when the Applicant Guidebook was drafted and the

Page 40 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

rights protection mechanisms were being considered and
created within ICANN, there was, I would say, fear and
trepidation in the trademark community that there might be as
many as 500 applications for new TLDs. Of course the reality
was that there were 1900 applications for 1300 unique TLDs.
And there was a feeling that the cost and the response time of
the UDRP was excessive for the amount of infringement that
might be going on in these new TLDs, especially since the pricing
models were not known at the time and since then, we've seen
every possible pricing model from different registries for
different TLDs.
So uniform rapid suspension was created as a narrow
supplement to the existing UDRP, and it was meant to address
clear-cut black-and-white cases where, just by looking at the
domain name, you would essentially know if infringement wag
going on.
So the three parts of the acronym. Uniform of course means
uniform administration of this rights protection policy across the
different providers.

And the three providers for the URS

accredited by ICANN so far are the National Arbitration Forum
located in Minneapolis, Minnesota, U.S.A. And we have in the
room the new director the arbitration for NAF.

The Asian

Domain Name Dispute Resolution Center based in Hong Kong. I
don't know if there's anybody here at this meeting from that

Page 41 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

group. And the newest one, just accredited recently, is the IP
Dispute Resolution Center in Milan, Italy. And we have two
representatives who we just met before the presentation started
who are here with us.
So we want to make sure that the policies are administrated
uniformly across them.
Rapid means really fast, faster than the UDRP that, from the
time of filing to the time of decision, and if there is a decision
that there is infringement going on to the remedy, which is
suspension of the domain, happens quickly within a matter of
just a few weeks, faster than the UDRP. And suspension is the
remedy. The remedy is suspension of the domain for the life of
the registration period for which it was registered. So if it was
registered for one year, it's going to be suspended from the time
that the decision is made until the end of that registration
period, whatever it is.
Some of the questions that have been raised, and we're not
going to read all of them again because they're all here on the
screen, and we want to hear from you whether we've -- they're
all -- the ones you care about are listed. Is the clear and
convincing standard of proof appropriate? There's a difference
between the UDRP -- they both require a showing by the
complainant of bad faith registration of the domain and use of

Page 42 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

the domain, but the burden of proof is higher for the URS
because it's supposed to be black and white, not a shades-ofgray case. So whereas in the UDRP, the complainant has to
prove their case by a preponderance of the evidence, for the
URS, it's a clear and convincing. It's a higher burden of proof.
And is that still appropriate based on what we've seen?
Should the URS allow for additional remedies such as a
perpetual block beyond the registration period. Or transfer.
Transfer is a very different remedy than suspension. And if
there's going to be transfer, then I know on the domain side
there's concern about attempted reverse domain hijacking, so
we have to look at that if we're going to consider transfer as a
remedy.
Is the current length of the suspension for the registration period
sufficient? Which is similar to the other question.
There are explicit expanded defenses listed in the URS, which is
not the case for the UDRP. While there is guidance from WIPO, in
particular, based on usage of the UDRP, there are defenses
written right into the URS, and we want to see if they're being
used and if they're being used effectively.
Should there be sanctions for abuse of the URS? Particularly
repeated abuse by a particular trademark owner. And is the

Page 43 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

existing appeals process for the URS appropriate or should it be
expanded and improved in some way?
So that's just a few of the questions we've received from the
community to date. But again, these are all nonexclusive. And
I'm going to stop at this point and open it up for comments from
the audience whether there are additional questions concerning
the URS or concerns that you have that are not displayed on this
slide that you'd like to bring to our attention now. But again, if
you don't bring them up now, we're going to be on each of these
RPMs for several months when we reach them in our process,
and there will be an opportunity at that time to explore anything
you want to.
So....
Bret.

BRET FAUSETT:

Bret Fausett from Uniregistry.
In the early days of the URS, we found that I don't think
trademark owners understood it very well because we had some
people who won the URS who contacted us and said, "Well, now
we'd like to get the name." And we said, "Well, you can't get the
name. It's suspended." "Well, then how do we get first in line to

Page 44 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

get it when it comes off suspension?"

EN

"Well, you need to

calendar that and you need to come back and register it."
And sometimes it was actually their trademark. So you want the
trademark owner to get it, but you can't give it to them because
it's suspended and there's no mechanism to let them be first in
the queue.
So we might want to think about how to perhaps convert the
URS to a UDRP or put the trademark owner first in line when the
thing comes off of suspension or have some mechanism to get
someone the name that they want after they've won the URS.

PHILIP CORWIN:

So, Bret, if I'm -- we've already brought up the possibility of
transfer, which brings its own debates, but you're suggesting
that we consider whether a winning -- a trademark owner that
wins a URS should basically get first dibs on purchasing that
domain when the registration period ends. I think that's a good
suggestion for us to look at.
Is someone -- I don't see hands raised or people --

J. SCOTT EVANS:

You need to raise your hands so we can bring you a mic. Is there
anybody?

Page 45 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

So it's your opinion in the room that we've asked all the
questions already that should be addressed by our working
group.
Okay. We're still open to suggestions as we proceed.
Yes, one from our new providers right here.

IVETT PAULOVICS:

Thank you. As mentioned by Philip --

PHILIP CORWIN:

Could you state your name and where you're from just for the
record.

IVETT PAULOVICS:

Yes, sorry. I'm Ivett Paulovics from -- I'm the URS case manager
of MFSD, the third URS service provider recently approved by
ICANN.
Obviously we have a natural role, so I can only report what
trademark owners ask before filing a URS complaint.
They would like to have -- to see clearly what does wordmark
mean, because in URS, you can rely your complaint only on a
wordmark.

And there are some different interpretations in

different jurisdictions what does a wordmark mean.

Page 46 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

I mean, for example, in a composite mark where there is also
verbal element, if it can be relied -- if a complaint can based
upon such kind of trademarks or not, because we have seen
different decisions from providers where exactly on the same
mark, there were two different decisions. In one case, Xaman
(phonetic) decided that it should be dismissed because it's a
figurative mark, so the complainant cannot base its complaint
on it. And in the other case, the domain name was suspended.

PHILIP CORWIN:

So what I hear you saying is that different providers for the same
mark in a different way.

IVETT PAULOVICS:

Yes.

PHILIP CORWIN:

So that's a concern we have to look at.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

I want to clarify for the record. I didn't hear her say different
providers. She said two different panelists handled the same
mark differently.

Page 47 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

IVETT PAULOVICS:

Yes, yes.

J. SCOTT EVANS:

So I don't know if that came from the same provider or -- I don't
want to impugn a provider here.

PHILIP CORWIN:

On a question like that on the validity of the mark, the panelists
should I think have a uniform point of view and not be reaching
different decisions, but we'll look forward to your input on that.

IVETT PAULOVICS:

Okay. Thanks.

PHILIP CORWIN:

Other questions or comments out there on URS?

KATHRYN KLEIMAN:

And, Phil, I might add, we're looking for input in general on
design marks because there has been controversy on how that's
been implemented both by the trademark clearinghouse and
the URS. So that's an area open for input, and we hope people
will provide it.

Page 48 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

J. SCOTT EVANS:

EN

All right. Any more questions? I'm standing between you and a
reception, so I'm just going to go to our last slide real quick and
let you know that we're doing data gathering in the first phase,
just on the new gTLD RPMs.

And here are some links for

information that we're seeking and taking in. And we would
welcome you to provide us with anything you think we should
consider. If you know of any studies yourself that have been
done by academics or in your particular jurisdiction something
that might be prevalent in your particular region or country that
we would need to look at, we welcome you to bring that forward
to us. You can contact Mary Wong, who is our staff liaison, or
Lars Hoffman, who is another of our staff liaisons, and David
Tait, the three. You can find their emails on the ICANN website
and send them this information and they will make sure it gets
disseminated to the list. Because only working group members
can post to our list. So we can't -- you'll have to submit it
through staff. So if you do have something you would like us to
consider, we ask you to contact us and make us aware of, and it
we will certainly consider it. But we are taking in information
now and looking at things that we need to gather and we're
looking to the community to assist us in any way possible.
So I think with that we're going to be able to give you 10 minutes
of your day back. I thank you, everyone, for your participation
today and for attending. And remember, if you want to attend

Page 49 of 50

HELSINKI – Cross-Community Session: Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms in All gTLDs

EN

our working group meeting, which will be an actual meeting of
the working group, we'll be working through issues, that's 8:00
here on Thursday morning. Thanks.
[ Applause ]

KATHY KLEIMAN:

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 50 of 50

Thank you.

