HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 10:45 to 12:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

We’re on? Super.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

All right. All right. It’s time for a little legal stuff now. I believe
we are a little bit late from the agenda, but in my mind, that’s
completely okay. We are ready to start the legal session of this
ccNSO member meeting days here in Helsinki. I’m pretty sure
you’ve all been welcomed to Helsinki like 10 times already, but I
do want to do it one more time.
So welcome. And I hope you have enjoyed your stay. We have
four presentations today, interesting topics. Something about
terms and conditions, court cases, digital security, and
memorandum of understanding with governments. Very wide
range of topics.
To my presenters, I would like to remind you that, please talk to
the microphone because I’ve heard we had some technical
problems. And we start with David Abrahams from Nominet UK.
Please, I give the mic to you.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

DAVID ABRAHAMS:

EN

Thank you very much. Good morning everyone. I’m just looking
at my computer as it gives me a nice error message. Just want
you want as you start your presentation.

Yeah, I’m David

Abrahams. I’m head of policy at Nominet, the dot UK domain
name registry. And thank you very much for giving me the
opportunity to speak here.
I wanted to give a short, and it will be short, overview of some of
the changes that we’ve made to terms and conditions in the dot
UK registry, and some of the lessons that we learnt in doing that.
Oh yeah, I’ve got to click that, don’t I?
So. Unlike in the gTLD world, and probably quite like a lot of you
in the CC world, Nominet has a contractual relationship with its
registrants. Now we still have a registrar model, and almost all
of our registrants are registered through registrars. But there is
this three-way relationship that you can see on the slide.
We have the registrar agreement between us as the registry and
the registrar. Obviously, there are the registrar’s own terms and
conditions that their customers sign up to. And then we have
our own registrant terms and conditions, which are between,
effectively, a contract between Nominet and the registrant of a
dot UK domain name. So I’m still relatively new to the ccNSO
community.

Page 2 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

So I actually wanted to ask all of you, how many of you in your
registers, have a direct contractual relationship with the
registrant of the domain name?
[SEPAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Some, yeah.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Yeah, have a contractual terms and conditions, something like
that. And how many do not?
So I would say that’s, you know, that’s quite a majority for
having that direct relationship, which is obviously gives us a
slightly different relationship to the gTLDs. And for Nominet,
this is quite interesting because you may know, we’re running a
couple of gTLDs ourselves and the backend for others, and so,
we have had to adjust our thinking for the gTLD world, for those
new gTLDs that we’re running.
Now, to just give you the background, the registrant terms and
conditions, which are the ones that I’m going to talk about are…
They set out our obligations and our rules, and the obligations of
the registrants.
So. Our terms and conditions were in need of a bit of an update.
Now, I think I have to declare this is an interest. I am not a

Page 3 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

lawyer, but one of the things that any of you who manage terms
and conditions and any of you who are lawyers will know, is that
it is very difficult to keep your terms and conditions up to date,
constantly in a rapidly changing environment, like the one that
we have, in an industry that changes quite quickly.
In a legislative environment that changes quite quickly. So the
way we’ve done that in the past is over the past probably five
plus years, is that we’ve done, what our legal team like to call,
laser surgery, because that sounds cool, laser surgery on our
terms and conditions, on the detailed terms in the contract,
which means that, for example, when we introduced
registrations that go on longer for two years, because you can
register a dot UK domain name up to 10 years, when we
introduced that, we just changed the particular conditions on
that.
We didn’t do a full review of the terms and conditions. So, when
we came to look at them in their entirety, towards the end of last
year, we found that, to our slight embarrassment, that they
haven’t been keeping pace with changes in the industry. Our
processes had changed significantly. Our registrars’ processes
have changed significantly. For example, we had, we no longer
had any kind of paper based systems. Everything was done
online, our registrants were able to access their accounts online,
as were our registrars.

Page 4 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

And of course, we no longer routinely communicate by fax
machine. But it was still quite a lot about fax numbers in the Ts
and Cs. Our laws and regulations that applied in the UK had
been updated. Some through UK rules, some through European
rules. So, yeah, that might be a headache that we have to have
all over again, relatively soon.
The other thing that we found on taking a fresh look at the terms
and conditions is that when they had been last fully reviewed,
there was a very different approach to the language and the
tone that had been used. So the terms and conditions were very
long. They had been used to try and explain what Nominet was,
and what sort of organization it was, and how it would operate.
And I think, at the time, that was meant to be a consumer
friendly way of making sure that people understood these things
when they bought their domain name. Perhaps it was more
innocent times before we all had to click on okay and agree 20
different times every time we switch on an iPhone or something
like that. But I think it’s fair to say that that wasn’t the right
place to be communicating those messages, and it certainly is
not the…
The lawyers were very clear on this, and I think, you know,
absolutely right on it, that in a contractual terms and conditions,
is not the right place to be describing your organization and

Page 5 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

what your goals and vision of the internet might be. We took the
brave decision of rather than doing a little bit more laser
surgery, we would go and do full open heart surgery on the
terms and conditions.
Now we didn’t quite, we didn’t quite start from scratch. But we
did do, we did make some significant changes. The terms and
conditions themselves came down from eight pages to six
pages, which is pretty good, and that wasn’t just fiddling with
the margins, or the fonts, or anything like that. It was really, you
know, we took some words out.
It went from 38 different sections down to 13. Now most of
those were relatively uncontroversial, not many people were
worried about their fax machines. But there were some which
were more controversial. So, and this goes back to some of the
issues of language that had been used in the previous terms.
One of the key reasons, one of the key drivers for us updating
our terms and conditions, was that last year, we decided we
were going to raise the prices for dot UK registrations. But our
terms and conditions stated that Nominet would price on a cost
recovery basis. Now I’m not sure they knew what that meant
when they put it in the terms and conditions originally, but we
weren’t doing that. We weren’t doing that before we raised our
prices, and we arguably never actually did that.

Page 6 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

It was true for some charges, but not for the domain registration
itself. And I think that’s probably what the drafters of the old
terms and conditions were trying to get at, but they hadn’t used
precise enough wording, so it was misleading, and wrong, and it
needed to change. We also, within the terms and conditions,
had a commitment that if we were to change any of those terms
and conditions, we would need to publically consult for at least
30 days, and I think that is one of the reasons why we hadn’t
made significant changes sort of more recently, because it
became a much more onerous task.
We had effectively made a rod for our own back.

So in

suggesting that we remove that, we were looking to be able to
make small changes to the terms and conditions, you know,
quite easily, without having to publish notice, and you know,
one of the things about these contractual changes, as it says, we
will issue a notice 30 days before they come into effect, and we
will do that by publishing them on our website.
And of course, the concept that consumers are constantly
checking our terms and conditions website to see if it has been
updated or not, it’s clearly a false one. The important thing
here, and of course it was a big issue in the consultation process
on these changes to the terms and conditions, was that we, we
were doing nothing to change our approach to policy making for
dot UK, which is still very open and consultative.

Page 7 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

This was purely about amendments to the terms and conditions
on their own. And then, and you might be detecting a thing
here, but for reasons no one can quite remember around the
office, we had a section that said, that if registrants weren’t
happy with any change in the terms and conditions, then they
could cancel their registration and the would receive a
[inaudible] refund.
Now, for a domain name that costs three pounds 50 a year, that
refund was never going to be that much, and in practice, we had
no way of doing it, because all of these registrations came
through registrars. And the registrars had no way of doing it,
and as far as I can tell, in the 20 years that Nominet has existed
and managed dot UK, no one has ever exercised that right.
So, that was one thing, another thing that needed to change. We
had already, through our laser surgery, taken some powers
within the terms and conditions, to allow us to suspend domain
names, if they were used in relation to criminal activity, or to any
activity that would damage the domain name system.
And I know that we’re probably a little bit more activist in that
respect than some other registrars. One of the things that we
wanted to do was make it very clear that we saw this as part of
our duty, and that we didn’t want to just be limited to damage to
the domain name system, we wanted to, you know, I’m sure

Page 8 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

we’ve all been seen an increase in malware and botnets and the
like, being detected within our registers.
And we wanted to be able to take action on that. So we broaden
the scope of the definition of a registration that could be
suspended. So, these were the more controversial elements
within the proposals. We ran a 30-day consultation, as we were
required to do under the terms and conditions. But that is
significantly shorter than we would normally do.
So for a policy change, we would normally run a 90-day
consultation. But we did feel that this was sufficient for the
people who were likely to respond to this rather specialist topic,
to make their responses. And this is what we found, and you can
see 36 responses to that consultation. So, having made that
point about engagement earlier in the, regarding the ccNSO
survey, I now realize that that was a complete hostage to
fortune.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
I haven’t been over it. 36, we had less answers in the ccNSO
survey had, but they were, as you can see, two-thirds of them
came from registrars, about a third from registrants. It was
actually a fairly representative cross-section that we got. But
the key thing here is this wasn’t seen as particularly big news in
the industry, probably in part because, at the same time as we

Page 9 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

announced the changes to our terms and conditions, we also
announced a price raise for the first time in our history, ever.
So that’s a good way of making sure that people are focused on
the right issues. Now, in terms of responses, there was general
support for having a shorter document with tighter language.
There was, as I say, concerns about some of those issues that I
mentioned. Some people felt that by taking out descriptions
about Nominet being a not for profit company, we were in some
way trying to dilute our commitment to that, which we were not
doing.
We were just saying, that’s not the right place for it. And we have
articles of association for the company, and that’s where, where
we have those things. A lot of the comments in relation, that we
got in relation to the cost recovery point were quite interesting,
in that they probably didn’t understand the term cost recovery
either.
Now that might have been our fault, maybe we didn’t make it
clear enough in the consultation.

The, probably the most

difficult balance to strike was that one over, should we consult
on future changes to the terms and conditions? There was an
acceptance amongst most people that small changes shouldn’t
need to go through a consultation process. If we change our
phone number, or our address, that has to be in the terms and

Page 10 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

conditions, but do you need to consult for 30 days on whether
you’re doing it or not?
I mean, that’s not really… it’s a change you’re going to make
anyway, so there is no point consulting on it, and respondents
understood that, but there were obviously other people who
saw it as some kind of way of taking an unequal power in the
terms. The refunds in the event of changes, nobody came up
with any practical suggestions for how we should do that,
unsurprisingly.
And under the domain suspensions discussion, there was widespread support for us to be able for us to act on things like
malware. And I think Nominet has got a fairly good reputation
within our stakeholder community for our security work, so
there is a fair amount of trust, but there were obviously some
people who were concerned about mission creep in saying, you
know, Nominet, it’s not your job.
But overall, not too many, no unexpected issues coming out of
the response. So what did we decide to do? We decided to press
ahead of the changes. They came into force on the 1st of March
2016, and nothing too much has happened. There hasn’t been
any adverse stakeholder reaction.
The one really interesting effect, I think, is by talking about this,
by seeking to change the clause on refunds, we actually got

Page 11 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

some claims in for refunds. And this was mainly linked to the
fact that some of our domain portfolio holders, when looking at
the price rise, were saying, ah, maybe I’ll hold a few less domains
than I had before. And so they saw this as a good opportunity to
claim a refund for the domains that they had decided to trim
from their portfolio.
I think it’s probably fair to say that the cost to Nominet of
providing those refunds was more than the refund itself, but we
did it. And there were relatively few claims, so it didn’t make too
much difference to us. I think that the key lesson for us, and one
I’d like to share with all of you, and Peter and I were talking
about it just before we started, is don’t be tempted to kick the
can down the road when it comes to things like this.
It’s too easy to say, oh, we’ll just do a little change. It’s probably
worth doing the full review quite regularly, to make sure that
you keep things up to date, because otherwise you end up with a
long shopping list of things that aren’t right. Okay? Thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you David. Very helpful and useful to hear. Now that I
look my [inaudible], I would say that if there are one or two
questions, we can have them now, and the rest of them we save
until the end of the session. So does anyone have a question for
David?

Page 12 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

Yes, Nigel, please.

NIGEL:

Hi David. It is working, good. First of all, congratulations. I
haven’t actually had the time to go read these yet, but I shall be
doing very shortly. Just to comment, I’m doing my best, that’s
better. All right. I have to get really close.
First of all, congratulations on doing this. I kind of, thank you for
giving me some work here. When we started our registry, we
initially took our terms and conditions from a telephone
contract, as in for a mobile phone. And we shortly reviewed
that, and we stole lots of Nominet’s ideas and concepts, pretty
much wholesale, so it’s our terms have migrated very much into
the way that Nominet has done this, simply because they’re big
and you’ve set a good example.
And in fact, even in some of the things that we’ve done, it’s
actually explicitly noted now. If you look at our good practice
terms, it’s explicitly noted that they’re inspired by Nominet. This
just means I’ve got to go and do the same exercise now, and
review how you’ve managed to cut some of these, because
nobody reads terms and conditions.
We have had to rely on them in certain cases recently, and
nobody reads terms and conditions. And they’re very shocked

Page 13 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

when you seek to rely on them. I get more visibility [inaudible]
because you’ve got millions of domain names, and all the
problem ones come to me, but thank you.

DAVID ABRAHAMS:

You’re very welcome, Nigel.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Anyone else? Peter, yes please.

PETER:

David, I was just wondering, after the public comment period,
and the following adoption of the terms and conditions, did you
engage to the existing registrants, did you, for instance, set up a
mass mailing to alert them, hey guys, now these are the new
terms and conditions are in place? Or not?

DAVID ABRAHAMS:

Not. No, we didn’t. And so, 10.7 million domain names, over 3
million individual registrants, no. I think that we are very, very
limited in when we would communicate directly with our
registrants, mainly because they don’t actually interact with
Nominet, so they don’t necessarily recognize the brand, and the
name, and so what we end up doing is creating a lot of work for

Page 14 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

our registrars, because people… Why is this company mailing
me about my domain name? I don’t know who they are.
And also, there are some… I mean, obviously, we… The good
thing about having the direct relationship, the good thing about
having the contractual terms, is that you can, when necessary,
communicate with them. For our gTLDs, we can’t. it would
actually probably fall into the new spam regulations or
something like that. You can’t… Even though we might have
the data, we wouldn’t be able to use it in that way, but because
we have a contractual relationship, we can.
But it has to be specifically about that, those terms. But no, we
didn’t do a mass mailing to tell people that the terms and
conditions they never read have now changed to something that
they’re not going to read.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Wow, I envy you guys with contracts and terms and conditions,
because we here in Finland, we only have the law, and try to
change the law. It takes only nine years.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
And now, Peter, I think it’s your turn. You had a court case that
impacted your terms and conditions somehow, tell us about it.

Page 15 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

PETER:

Okay, thank you. Right. Okay. Like this? All right. A bit odd, but
we’ll manage. Well, this is going to be very much in line with
what David has just presented us, and I’m so grateful that he set
the scene for me, because for dot BE, we’re living in exactly the
same context as Nominet does.

We have a triangular

relationship, registry, registrar, registrants, and our contractual
link with the registrants is basically the terms and conditions.
So we’re in exactly the same model. Now, we haven’t gone
through a change of what terms and conditions yet, but we,
we’re about to. The reason what cost it, is an unfortunate court
case that we actually, because it has been dormant for such a
long time, that we actually forgot about.
So but the, everything started in 2001, when a certain individual,
I’m going to call him Mr. X…
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Sorry. Okay. That should be better. Yeah, I’m going to look at
that slide, yeah.
So we have a certain individual that registered the name
[inaudible] dot BE. Now this is a well-known local brand owned
by a certain company called [inaudible], and they are
manufacturers of [syrups?], that you mingle with water to have

Page 16 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

flavor to water or lemonade if you want.

And it’s also a

geographical name, more specifically, it’s a village in the south
of Belgium.
So, the company [inaudible] files an alternative dispute
resolution procedure against that Mr. X, and he regains control
over the domain name. So the outcome is that the third party
decider, or there is the transfer of the domain, which happens
somewhere mid-February 200 and no, not 10. That should have
been 2002, probably. So anyway, case closed, you would say.
Now, following the outcome of the ADR, we contact Mr. X, and
we send him an invoice for the admin costs that we repay,
reimbursed, to the [inaudible] company. So what I should add
here, is all alternative dispute resolution is very close, it’s 95
match, 95% match with the UDRP that you have in place for
gTLDs.
So you need, basically you need to prove the existence of three
conditions. If those three conditions are fulfilled, you again, you
can get the transfer or deletion of the domain name at stake.
Now, peculiar for our ADR, is a reimbursement mechanism. If
you use the ADR, you get the domain name back.
We as a registry, we are going to refund you the administrative
costs of the procedure. Obviously, we do want to get our money
back as well, so we are going to reclaim it from the previous

Page 17 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

owner.

EN

And this is obviously in our terms and conditions,

otherwise it would not be enforceable. So important note here,
that the system of, the existence of the alternative dispute
resolution mechanism, was already in place since 2000.
So before the actual registration of this domain name, but the
reimbursement mechanism was not in place yet at that time.
We added it someway later. And this is obviously having its
impact on the following of this case, because Mr. X refuses to pay
for the invoice. As a consequence, we start litigation. Our base
policy is that if a former registrant is a company or an individual
in Belgium, refuses to pay for the ADR reimbursement, then we
start litigation.
If there is somebody living outside, and especially outside the EU
borders, it’s simply not cost efficient to start litigation. So we
had a number of cases, until now, until this one, we had won all
of them, but in this case, the Court of Commerce rules against
us. Somewhere in 2011. Now, we argued that well, since Mr. X
registered a domain name, he is bound by our terms and
conditions.
He accepted everything, including that reimbursement rule. And
as the reimbursement rules are effective 2009 onwards, and the
ADR case was only concluded in 2010, so clearly, Mr. X has to pay
for the invoice. Now, Mr. X, however, was very brief, and he said,

Page 18 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

well, that’s all a bit of rubbish. The only version of the terms and
conditions that apply to me, are the ones that were presented to
me at the time of the registration in 2001.
Now, the reasoning… Did I miss…? Did I skip…? No? Okay. So
the Court of Commerce, ruled against us and its reasoning was,
okay, you have indeed inserted in the terms and conditions, a
right to unilaterally change the registration rules, but however,
this has nothing to do with registration rules. The point of
argument here is your conditions regarding alternative dispute
resolution, which is not a registration rule, hence, I throw it out.
So obviously, we were not all too happy with that. It’s more like
a play of words than a real legal argument because well, we
think that registration conditions, registration rules, it refers to
the whole set of the terms and conditions. And not only to those
specific technical registration rules that are going to define who
and who has not right to register at dot BE.
So we file an appeal against this case, and then suddenly the
case goes numb. We have an exchange of arguments, and then
nothing happens for several years.

And to be honest, I

completely forgot about this case. And so, just two months ago,
finally, we get a judgment of the Court of Appeals in our letter
box. So I was pretty much startled by that fact alone, and even
more startled when I start reading the thing because the court

Page 19 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

just reaffirms completely what the Court of Commerce has been
saying.
They are hitting on the nail again, like oh yeah, you can change
your terms and conditions unilaterally, but registration rules,
not the rest. So, all of our arguments got basically thrown out,
and Mr. X, who is, by the way, who has a history of
cybersquatting, he walks. So what’s the outcome and what’s
the lesson learned?
Well, it has been proven beyond any reasonable doubt, I would
say, that the courts have a clear tendency to evaluate terms and
conditions in a restrictive way, if you’re in an unique market
position, not to use the N word. The terms and conditions, even
when the subtitle clearly says, change of terms and conditions,
to the section, to make it sure that there is a price to the whole
set of terms and conditions, still the court says, no, no, no, no.
it’s limited to your registration rules.
You cannot use this mechanism for your whole set of terms and
conditions. One of our arguments was, and we thought it was
fairly important that we did our very best to inform every
registrant of the subsequent changes we have made to the
terms and conditions. That was why I was asking the question
to David, because if we go to for a major change of the terms and

Page 20 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

conditions, we do effectively a mass mailing to our registrants,
either direct, either through the registrars.
But the court through it out. They said, well, it doesn’t matter
whether you informed your customers or not. I’m just not going
to keep that into account. So, the only good thing that came out
is that the courts, or both courts, confirmed the possibility that
we can work with unilateral changes for the terms and
conditions. So what are our next steps?
Well, I’m a bit pissed off, to say the least. So, our sweet revenge
is going to be that we are going for a full, complete review of the
terms and conditions, because as David pointed out, you have
some small things that you leave on the road. That you say,
well, we should update our terms and conditions, but we are not
going to do that much effort for just some small stuff.
So we had already a whole bag of small stuff, that in itself, would
have justified an update of the terms and conditions. But this is,
of course, now we have a very dangerous precedent, that I want
to neutralize as soon as possible. So obviously, now is the time
to do a full and complete review. My aim is, and I’m really
encouraged by the example set by Nominet because they have
clearly done the same, is I want to redraft the terms and
condition to exclude any kind of ambiguity, because when you
draft a first set of terms and conditions, when you start your

Page 21 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

activities, and now you’re more than a decade further ahead,
there is a lot of the wording that has become vague, and that
you say, well, we can still live with it.
But if you go for a full redress, it really might be the time to say,
we are going to look very thoroughly into this language, and we
go and set it to a new and modern standard. So and obviously,
I’m going to add certain clauses, and one of them is going to
be… Well, because the court confirmed that they don’t care
whether we inform the registrant or not, so I’m going to nail it
into my terms and conditions, I’m going to say, well, every time
terms and conditions change, the registrant is supposed to have
accepted the most recent version, ultimately at the moment of
the renewal of [inaudible] domain name.
So we had this big advantage, that we have a yearly renewal of a
domain name. So each time we have, what I would call, a
substantial legal contractual point that I can use as an anchor to
have a silent buy-in or acceptance of the new version of the
terms and conditions. So, conclusions about, keep in mind that
courts are very restrictive when it comes down to the
interpretation of your terms and conditions. It happened to us,
but it probably could happen to each and any of you.
Also, take with you that you can be creative in your terms and
conditions. In our case, we managed and got confirmation, that

Page 22 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

you can work with clauses that allow you to have unilateral
changes, which is in a normal contractual relationship, which is
some bit strange, but feel free to play with it if you see that there
is advantages for your registry.
Obviously, as stressed before, working with a renewal period
gives you a much wider array of changing your terms and
conditions. And well, last and not least, take advantage of, what
I would call, David’s and my experience, to do a sanity check of
your terms and conditions, because for many of us, it’s a
document that is somewhere, laying down there in a dark
corner, but it’s one of your contractual cornerstones. Please
don’t forget that.
So do a regular sanity check. That’s it. Thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you Peter. Also, very helpful to hear. One thing is for
sure, you never know what comes out of court.
And the other thing, seems to be sure that terms and conditions
need to be checked on a regular basis. Now, there is a question
waiting already. Wonderful.

Page 23 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EBERHARD LISSE:

EN

Belgium is a civil jurisdiction that mainly relies on codified law,
whereas many English speaking countries, in partly the United
Kingdom and [inaudible] for example, are common law
jurisdiction which mainly rely on precedent. Would it have made
a difference if your terms and conditions say that your
applicants are required to regularly review the terms of
conditions and policy as published on our website, and if there is
no comeback after a while, to be deemed that they would have
accepted those.
Would that have made a difference in your case?

PETER:

It’s a very interesting question, Eberhard. And the short answer
is no. Do I have 100% certainty about it? No, but from what I
know, from jurisprudence, we know that many courts toss out a
kind of obligation, especially if it’s oriented to a private
customer. It might be different for a business customer, but
especially for a consumer. The courts are just going to throw it
out, and they’re going to say, well, you cannot put that
obligation on a private consumer, that he should virtually check
your website every day to find out whether something has
changed in his set of rights and obligations.
So I don’t think it would have made a difference.

Page 24 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

The last question.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

I’ve got two questions. One is, if you would like to disclose how
much money you are talking about, in this case with Mr. X. And
the second question is that the amendment for the registrant
being, must be knowledgeable of the most recent version of the
constraints is taking it [inaudible] the finish version, where we
apply the law, and there we have that ignorance of the law is not
a relevant defense.

PETER:

That’s the difference between the legal framework and a
contractual framework.

It wouldn’t work in a contractual

framework. Regarding the costs, the fixed price for an ADR
procedure, is 1,750 Euros. So that’s only the administrative
costs that are charged by the ADR organization that does it for
us, because we don’t do our own ADR. We work together with
the Belgium Mediation and Arbitration Center.
So what we do is, we reimburse those costs, but not legal fees. If
you hire a lawyer or an attorney to assist you with the case,
that’s your personal cost. We only reimburse the 1,750 Euros.
So basically, that is what we invoice to Mr. X, and obviously, the

Page 25 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

legal fees involved with those two court litigation, seriously
outnumber the value of the difference itself.
But for us, it was a matter of principle.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Good. Halfway through. Next one, for the next, we have a
presentation from Columbia, Eduardo [Santoyo]. Did I say it
right? Something about the importance of digital security.

EDUARDO [SANTOYO]:

Yes, thank you. Thank you very much for the invitation and to be
present here, to have the opportunity to talk about again. The
relationship of this topic that we have been talking about, the
terms and conditions in cybersecurity, because we are really
doing a link between these two things in order to handle these
[inaudible] cybersecurity.
We had included in our terms and… We have a mixed process
between a registry, registrar, and a registrant relation. We are a
registry who has direct registrations to some registrants, as the
registrants from the domain name, from that dot GOV, dot CO,
dot EDU, [inaudible], and dot ORG, [that’s you?]. But we have a
registry registrar system for that conduct dot CO, or for dot CO,
or dot [inaudible] net dot CO.

Page 26 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

In those cases, we don’t have the direct relationship with the
registrants. So we need to manage both things. But in all the
cases, so in the cases that we have contracts with registrants,
where we are registrar, we have included in terms and
conditions that the registration is driven in good faith, that is not
allowed to have malicious activity within the, in the use of the
domain name, dot CO.
And also, we have these provisions in the terms and conditions
that we have with our registrars. So we ask them to include in
the contract that they have with the registrants, these specific
prohibitions. So, this is an important to understand what is this
[inaudible] related, how we would handle this type of security
[inaudible].
And probably, I’m going to go a little bit fast for a few slides, but
has only [inaudible] in some specific topics.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Okay. I’m going to be shorter. Okay, sorry. Yes, okay. A little
thing about us. Almost all of you know that we started these
new activity in 2010 to ask [inaudible] internet, nevertheless the
domain name has been delegated for [inaudible] from 1991.
Now, we have almost a little bit more than 2.2 million domain
names registered all around the world.

Page 27 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

And in Columbia, all of the Columbian agency, governmental
agencies use that call as the main domain.

90% of dot

companies are using dot CO, and dot CO is also used worldwide
for many companies.

So for that reasons, we are really

commitment in order to support initiative and for activities to
continue the security, stability, and reliability of our domain
name, because we understand that we have a big responsibility
on DS.
And of course, in cybersecurity matters, we also identify that
begin to have half, or more than half, the terms and conditions
with our registrars and our registrants, we also have to have a
very good relation with the global and the local cybersecurity
community. In order to work together, in order to [inaudible], or
in order to prevent the misuse of the dot CO.
And then we have relationship with many organizations
worldwide. Our strategy has many, many things is to have, of
course, very good standards for IT operations. We are now a
company. We are a [inaudible] company. We are based in
[inaudible] services as a provider.
everything now today.

Our engineering and

We have active participation, as

stakeholders at both levels, at national, regional, and
worldwide.

Page 28 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

So we [inaudible] in cybersecurity [inaudible]… as Columbia,
because that was also among data that we receive from the ICT
ministry in Columbia. We have a contract with the Columbian
Ministry in order to manage the dot CO domain name. And this
is one of the specific requirements in the Columbian
[government?].
Okay. We set in process using the terms and conditions, some
specific procedures. One is that what we call rapid domain
complaint process, which is precisely to ask the registrants, or
the registrars, or the registrants through the registrars, to look
how to compliant the terms and conditions on the [inaudible].
The tool is one thing that we call, internally, the registry
mitigation services, is now that we are [inaudible] to provide
services, including all of the registries. How would this work?
We receive alerts from many different trusted sources about the
use or the misuse of the dot CO domains in malicious activities.
We review these alerts, and finally, we discover if some of them
are really incidents that has to be handled right now, or some of
them are really something that was an incident in the past, but
now is not online, or is not an active to it for the system.
And [inaudible] the scope of these activities, we are talking
about phishing, farming, malware distribution, malicious
hacking, and defacements. We do not focus on content about

Page 29 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

[inaudible] privacy, cybersquatting, or other malicious activity.
What for? Because we have in Columbia, and a specific law
allow this first list of malicious activity that invite us to be more
active in order to monitor what is happening on this, and we
have for the others, more…
We have to realize more in a normal justice process [inaudible]
into account. What we do if we find an alert that is actionable,
and we validate that through our service that we have
[inaudible] dot CO? That we do is in the cases that we are the
registrar, we inform to the registrant that the domain name is
being used for a malicious activity, and we invite them,
according the terms and conditions to review the activity that
has been in place that for domain.
In the cases that we have not relation, direct relation with the
registrar, we notify the registrant, in the cases that we are
working with registrars, we notify the registrar that we found
that some specific domain that has been registered through to
them, is being used for malicious activity, and we invite them to
handle the case with the registrar.
In some specific cases as [inaudible] dot CO, or some other
specific, we contact directly the registrant, but those are really
exceptional cases. This is something that is, and it continues
[inaudible] process and it continues [inaudible] activities, to

Page 30 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

review the terms and conditions, and to be sure that the
registrants and the registrars are really aware that we, what are
we expecting from them when we review, this is specific points
in our terms and condition, and that was a specific requirement
from the Columbian [ITC?] Ministry.
Some [specific] non-rapid registry monitoring system that is not
actually for our side, like spam or [inaudible] or E-policy, or
cybersquatting, that we do is that when we know cases about
this, we [inaudible] that information to the Columbian Law
Enforcement Authority, because we are not the authority to
manage this.
And they have to investigate and decide to take or not action
about that. Some lessons learned is, after five years of doing
this, 90% of the alerts are not action, so many of them are
[inaudible] because they’re probably the effective party real life
has been used, his side in a malicious activity and they correct
that by themselves, or 56% of that are not malicious after the
research.
Therefore, we view every single alert. We receive, more or less,
two and two and a half million alerts for a year. So we have a lot
of activity within this. And we only notify to the registrant, or to
the registrar when we really identify that the malicious activity is
in place.

Page 31 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

That we learn, is that collaboration on this is a really an
important matter, more probably that having in the contract,
the terms and conditions, because we found that having a very
good work, acting together with other organizations, not just to
share information, as LACTLD, LACNIC, and the [inaudible]
working group, ISOC, or some others, has been very useful for
them and for us, ending in the interest to keep a safer place for
the dot CO space.
This is yes to have a map, and how are we related in the map of
cybersecurity, as a registry in Columbia. We have been related
with the ICT ministry, we have a contract with them. They said
the policy to manage the dot CO, and they of course, execute the
[inaudible] and policy support for Columbia. We have had direct
relationships within the ministry of defense in Columbia. We
have an agreement with them, where we provide them
information about the malicious activity that we receive the
information on the dot CO space, so they can do all of the
intelligence that they need to do.
And there are several bodies internally in the Columbian
cybersecurity policy, which is the culture, the ministry and
defense, and the national [inaudible] courts, and of course, the
relation that they have with other international public bodies.
We have specific relation, and we have an active relationship

Page 32 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

with our registrars in our, in [inaudible] service, and with the
registrants, to the terms and conditions, as mentioned before.
And of course, we also have a very good relation, this is not a
contract, this is more agreements that we have with sources to
provide us information about, we are not monitoring this space
in the dot CO. We are asking for, to people who do this activity,
to inform us every single bad activity that they identified on the
dot CO space.
And we have been working also very close with ICANN in order to
share the experiences that we have working together in all of
this cybersecurity related topics with some others, [inaudible],
Latin America, as ICANN invited us to work together with them to
present our cases to the organizations of American States, we
have with them a very close relationship.
And we had been working together in order to include our
strategy to Paraguay and to Peru, invited by ICANN too. So, I
have some of the slides, but it is not very relevant in order for the
cases that we are discussing right now. So I’m going to stop here
and to give the floor, you have questions. Thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you very much Eduardo. Interesting. A lot of work, very
important topics. Digital security, that concerns us all, I believe.

Page 33 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

My fault, we started too late, that’s why I won’t give any
questions right now for you, in case there is something very,
very, very urgent to ask right now.
Instead, I would like to give the mic to Jay Daley, from New
Zealand.

You have recently signed a memorandum of

understanding with your government, and we would like to hear
about it.

JAY DALEY:

Thank you. So, yes, I will start, I know by explaining a little bit of
the structure of the dot NZ ccTLD, because I know that many of
you are confused why there are always 55 of us that come along
for these meetings.

So the dot NZ ccTLD, the designated

manager is a membership society and a charity called Internet
New Zealand. And many of you will know Jordan, who is the
chief executive of Internet New Zealand.
That organization actually has very little to do with dot NZ. It
works on other areas, it works as the voice of the internet, and
internet users, delivers internet policy, provides community
funding, which it grants, and runs community events. So our
local equivalent of the IGF. Internet New Zealand owns two
companies, and these companies are quite independent with
their own boards.

Page 34 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

The one on the left is the registry, NZ RS, and I’m the chief
executor of that. We are the registry. We run the marketing and
channel management. We do broad technical research, and we
do business development and introduction of new products.
Then the other companies, the domain name commission, and
Debbie is the chief executive of that. They set the dot NZ policy.
They authorize registrars.

They regulate the market.

They

handle complaints and they manage disputes. So through that
policy that they set, which is what we then implement as the
registry there.
Right, so we have recently signed a memorandum of
understanding for the management of the dot NZ country code
top level domain.

This is an entirely voluntary agreement

between Internet New Zealand, the parent organization, and a
government department. It took 18 months of discussions and
negotiations to achieve. On one side we had us three chief
executives, doing the negotiation, and on the other side, was the
GAC rep for the New Zealand government, who is actually in the
room to answer questions as well.
And so, we sign that in May 2016. Now, people often ask us why
would we enter into a voluntary agreement with government?
Aren’t we better off leaving no contract at all, no agreement?
But we think that this tackles three important risks. Internet
New Zealand, as I mentioned earlier, does internet policy, and so

Page 35 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

it regularly finds itself disagreeing with the government on that
policy.
So, we have had two big disagreements recently.

One is

regulated pricing for the monopoly infrastructure, that’s
[copper] in the ground, and a disagreement on surveillance and
interception laws. And we wanted to prevent anything that,
those type of disagreements then having a contagious effect on
dot NZ. The next thing that we have is that there are plenty of
people, generally telecommunication companies, who claim
that dot NZ profits are a public tax, and that they believe that
the government should take control in distributing where those
profits go. Their view is, why does Internet NZ get to decide?
Our answer is because we invented it, go away. And if you
invented something, you would be in a good position, but that’s,
a better answer might be needed.
And the other thing is that there are no authoritative documents
to point to. And so, regularly, there is an assumption just to
amongst the general population, that something this important
must be government controlled, and there is a regular fit from
newcomers who come into this, whether they come into
government or into some other organization that has a role in
this misunderstanding the nature of this relationship.

Page 36 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

So, the MOU tackles this in a number of different ways. The role
of a government is very clearly defined, and thereby limited.
Now, government, of course, can pass any law it likes, change its
mind entirely, so that doesn’t, it’s not a permanent limitation,
but it is a practical one, unless they choose to then take a very
strong option of changing the law in that way, or tearing up the
MOU.
It provides recognition and definition of the Internet New
Zealand role. So that makes it difficult for third parties to
challenge that and say, you know, we think we should have that
money or to do something else. We already have some practices
within Internet New Zealand, that have now become public
obligations, and that is good because that keeps us honest, and
that is in the community interest to keep us honest in that way.
The MOU has a defined process resulting concerns, which fits
with RFC 1591, and the whole thing is pinned to the external
documents. The RFC 1591, FOI, GAC principles, and our own TLD
principles.

And importantly, the MOU does not talk about

funding, and it does not talk about intellectual property. Those
are left as operational matters in that way. Okay.
So the role of the New Zealand government, as set out in our
MOU, is that it asserts that it is responsible for ensuring the
stability of the internet, that dot NZ is reliable and responsible,

Page 37 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

that dot NZ is run consistent with RFC 1591, and that dot NZ
supports the interests of users. So yes, we are in this fantastic
position where the government is now committed to ensuring
that we follow RFC 1591. We could not have asked for a better
result really, in that way. Okay. Because of course, the threat
that many others see is that the governments don’t recognize
RFC 1591, and think that they have sovereign rate straightaway.
So there was a recognition then of Internet New Zealand role,
recognition that it is the designated manager. So this goes back
to the RFC 1591 phrase that any discussion about ownership is
not relevant.

This is about…

Yeah, the service to the

community. Recognizes that the process through which we
became the designated manager was a proper process,
involving the local internet community.
It recognizes that we make a surplus for dot NZ, and we use it to
further the objects of Internet New Zealand, the bit I talked
about before. And that those objects may include disagreeing
with government.

And it recognizes that we decide and

implement the dot NZ market structure, and we regulate that
market. And that we develop and set all dot NZ policy to benefit
and meet the needs of the local community.
So it’s a strong recognition there. As I mentioned, many of our
existing practices become obligations, and this is something we

Page 38 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

were very happy with. So we commit to a high standard of
public transparency, and we commit to continuing the
following. Publish our annual report in a public and timely
fashion.
As an incorporated society, there is no need to make it public, so
it requires us to do that. Hold governance meetings in public.
And again, public publish minutes. Again, there would be no
legal requirement to do that without this, but we do it anyway.
Provide the public reports on how the surplus from dot NZ is
spent. And then engage in broad community consultation and
any changes to the objects, which are the overriding principles
of how we would spend it on dot NZ money, and on dot NZ
policy.
There is only one new obligation which came in, which we were
very happy with, and this is regularly testing the views of the
broader community for these purposes: to ensure that Internet
NZ is demonstrably in-touch with internet users. Now, this came
about because the government minister had experience of other
societies where, membership societies, where the management
there had become quite strongly political and there was a
disconnection with the membership.
And this is to prevent that happening, to ensure that we are
keeping… Effectively we’re delivering what is needed by our

Page 39 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

user base. Also to increase community understanding of its own
views. So to help the community understand what it things, and
to identify key issues of concern. So this needs a feedback loop,
so this requires a public report back on the views expressed.
So finally, one of the most important bits in here is a process for
resolving concerns. We wanted to make sure that there was a
process that was consistent with RFC 1591. But we also wanted
to make sure that this process, where the government could
invoke it, was available to any significantly interested party.
This is not exclusive to government.
So, stage one is open dialogue.

If they are unhappy with

something, they can send us a please explain notice, and notify
us and give us time to resolve and come back and explain. Much
the same that anybody could do, they could send us that. And
we would choose where not to respond, same case.
Stage two, is initiate a community conversation, which is to
say… Basically to ask some questions about our ownership. So
if they’re unhappy with the response in the dialogue, the
community conversation would need to be multistakeholder,
open and inclusive, and then to discuss the problems that they
have with us, okay?
So, then if they do have that conversation, there is a potential
where stage three is reached, where there is a community

Page 40 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

consensus that the management of dot NZ is inconsistent with
RFC 1591, and that there is a better local RFC 1591 compliant
manager out there that this could be transferred to. If all of
those three steps are made, and followed, and then within
Internet NZ, we would agree, and would support the transfer to
another designated manager.
Now, we… There are circumstances that we can understand
when all of us that are currently in positions within that, with the
overall group there have left, it has been replaced by people
who share very different principles, and very different views, and
they attempt to turn it into something very different.
So we are not really protective of ourselves as individuals, we’re
protecting against a chain in our organization that would no
longer suit RFC 1591 by doing that. So, that’s it.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you Jay. And that really was it. I was honored to be here
with these four gentlemen. Thank you for listening, the legal
session today. Now, it’s time for lunch, after one and a half hour,
we come back here. And there is a question. We can have
questions. [Inaudible] our time for questions, but what about
the lunch? Sure, we can have questions. As many as you wish.

Page 41 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

EN

That was quite interesting, this session. Well, Jay, I have a
question for you. You know that we have something like what
you have organized, we have had it for quite a few years. The
objective is slightly different because it’s really aimed at
ensuring the stability of dot NL, making sure that it’s always
available, it’s not so much on how we govern it. I’m interested
to know, can your contract end? And what happens if it ends?
And my second question is, if I understood you well, it’s with
Internet NZ, the contract. So I would also be interested in if the
contract ends, or if you run this four step process, and the
conclusion is, we have to transfer dot NZ to somebody else, can
the two subsidiaries, can they still remain? Or is the whole thing,
and you have to replace everything.

JAY DALEY:

Okay. Yes, either side can cancel, by a letter to the other one.
There are no particular implications from that, in the MOU. We
couldn’t have or expect anything else, other than that really, as a
way forward. But it would be a very symbolic gesture, and it
would then lead to considerable community discussion, which is
the intent. It brings the community back into seeing this as
something important, and stepping up to have some
involvement.

Page 42 of 47

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

The structure that we have is a structure that is never intended
to be there forever. It has changed before, and will probably
change again, at some point. And yes, if there were to be a
transfer, then all of that would be replaced. This is the structure
of the two subsidiary companies, is merely a mechanism for
delivering dot NZ.

And if there was a transfer to a new

designated manager, then a new mechanism would be put in
place.
We have no idea what that would be.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Okay. Thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

[Inaudible], Malawi. I wanted to find out again, from the dot NZ
experience, who initiated the MOU? How as it initiated? Was it
from the government side? Or was it from dot NZ side? I also
wanted to know, how it is linked in government. Government
has a whole big structure.

At what level does it link into

government? And finally, what happens when the structure of
the government side changes?
How does the MOU take care of this?

Page 43 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

JAY DALEY:

EN

Okay. There had been discussions about this on and off for
many years. So it was initiated by us, but that’s a very light
touch because there was already some willingness at the other
end to be talking about these things, okay?
The second part of your question…?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

At what level…?

JAY DALEY:

At what level, right. So in the government, it is signed by the
Chief Executive of Ministry, and but it has had the eyes of a
minister over it, but it has not been signed by a minister, and
does not require the cabinet approval at that level, okay? And,
third part?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Change in the structure on the government side.

JAY DALEY:

Right. So thank you Carlos. This is intended to help with that,
because when a new minister comes in, there is a very clear
document that sets out for that minister where these things
stand. And that minister can be briefed in that regard and
shown that. So it’s meant to help.

Page 44 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

EN

Okay. [Inaudible] from Chile. A question about the Belgium. As I
understand it, the outcome of the court case was that you could
change the terms and conditions regarding to registrations, but
not about other stuff. So you decided to do a full rewrite. What
would happen if Mr. X were to go to court, why would the court
not decide that in your [inaudible] right, you could change only
those provisions about registrations, but not about other things?

PETER:

You need to make a distinction between what you can’t change,
and what you can change unilaterally. So if we say, we are going
to have a full redress of the terms and conditions, at a certain
moment in time, it will automatically apply for all new
registrations, obviously.

It will also apply, unless heavily

disputed in court, for the existing ones. Usually it doesn’t come
that far. In this specific case, Mr. X has no reason whatsoever to
start litigation, because he walked away with it anyhow.
Even if we would change the terms and conditions now, it would
not have retro effect on his position. We will never be able again
to send this gentlemen an invoice, unless of course, we succeed
in having confirmation of that rule that we are planning to put in
the terms and conditions right now, that ultimately the moment
you renew your registration, you ought to be aware of the then

Page 45 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

EN

applicable version of the terms and conditions. Now where is
the legal risk? And that’s probably why it touched upon.
If we would have a new case against Mr. X, and expose that he
did not have only one name at that time, registered in 2001, but
he has to, or another similar case that dates early from 2000s.
Yes, there is a chance that the court are going to reconfirm, and
to say, well no, registration rules you can change unilaterally,
not the rest. So now you have changed the whole set of your
terms and conditions, fair enough for all new registrations that
have been registered since then, but you cannot imply it
retroactively.
So there is a legal risk there, but if I don’t do anything, the
situation is only going to be worse. So at least what we should
try to do is try to fix it. But if historical cases like this would pop
up, we might be in problem. Now luckily enough, I don’t suspect
that there will be many cases of this. Either you have now
already pending litigation, or at least disputes, or there will be
none in the future.
So, I’m quite okay with it, but yes, there might be a legal risk.
But it’s going to be, it’s always going to be limited to cases like
reimbursement of ADR costs. I don’t think it will go further than
that.

Page 46 of 47

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 2)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Any more questions? Comments? If not, I kick you out for lunch.
Be back at 12:30.
Be back at 1:30, not 12:30.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 47 of 47

EN

