HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 13:30 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Okay, everyone. Thank you for coming to this session, the
Address Support Organization Address Council Plenary Session.
We will start in a couple of minutes, so get comfortable, get
seated.
Oscar, you can already take your seat at this stage. You’re a
presenter. No running away.
Hi. Do you want to join us as well?
Okay. I guess we’re gathered now, more or less. My name is Filiz
Yilmaz. I’m the Vice-Chair of the Address Support Organization
Address Council.
Yeah, we have a few people here that will give us updates. Our
agenda involves both representatives from the Numbers
Community, as well as we have our NRO Chair, Oscar. And we
have a guest speaker at the end, Lousewies. She is the NomComselected Board member, and she has been very involved with
the Numbers Community over the early days. So we wanted to
hear her perspectives and have a bit of engagement through her
impressions.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

Can we advance the slides? Yes. Right.
My name is Filiz Yilmaz, as I said. I’m the representative of the
RIPE region. This is the policy meeting of the new ICANN meeting
structure, right? ICANN is known for domain names and the
policy developed around it. But we used to say, and our old
Board members used to say as well, that ICANN as a name has
two Ns, and that one N at the end is Numbers. The policies
around numbers are developed through certain policy
development policies, which you do not see exactly on the
ICANN fora because they are developed through regional
mechanisms really, but more processes around the globe. We
are the link to the ICANN community for these communities,
really grassroots communities.
I’ll talk a little about this; what the number policies are, what
we’re talking about here, and also how they’re developed. Then I
will leave it to my colleagues to go through their regions and
give instances and latest developments on what is being
discussed in the latest times. I think we will spot some common
points there.
If we advance – yes. So who are these people? Who is the
Numbers Community? With the Numbers Community, you will
be hearing certain acronyms – we are ICANN, anyways – like RIR
(Regional

Page 2 of 57

Internet

Registry)

communities,

Numbers

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

Communities. We have our own understanding of abbreviations,
too.
We are organized around the globe within five regions, each
region under the service responsibility of an RIR. So you will be
hearing Regional Internet Registries and RIR communities.
Communities are people who actually develop policies. These
people work for organizations – ISPs, IXs, and enterprises. For
example, my day job is at Akamai Technologies. I’m paid
through Akamai, but I am a volunteer in the Numbers
Community, and I take part in the RIPE community region,
mainly. All my colleagues have similar situations here.
But then there’s the RIRs (Regional Internet Registries), who
coordinate assignment, allocation, and registration of resources.
Which resources are these?
Hello. Hi. Oh, there is more. Thanks. Great.
These institutions, these organizations, are legal organizations.
They have legal bindings, and they coordinate with their own
communities. They implement the policies that their respective
communities have developed.
So if we can advance the slide – yes.

Page 3 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

What are we talking about with this regional policy
development? Thereabout – again, as I said about numbers –
allocation of Internet Protocol and Autonomous System
numbers (AS numbers and IP numbers). As you may have heard,
we are not going to get into the technical parts of this, but they
make the Internet work, these resources.
The policy development of these? The need came already,
decades ago. It was recognized. RIPE itself has an almost 30-year
history in this kind of working. The need stems from the region;
the specific needs of the region, the business requirements, the
grassroots practices. And there are regional differences. This is
also why we have five different regions. The way ISPs work, in a
way, and how their needs are addressed may not be exactly the
same as how ISPs operate in Europe. So there was a need for
that regional touch.
It’s also important to keep those logistics within your grassroots
communities. Your [own] support. You’re in the region. You’re
[of] the people.
When I was developing these slides, I actually found this from an
old presentation of mine: the lifecycle of policy development.
Basically, there is a need. These resources are registered and
assigned according to policies that the community develops. But

Page 4 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

these policies also follow the technological developments and
business requirements.
So it’s a cycle. You have some kind of policy. You have a rule.
Let’s call it a rule in simplest terms. There’s a purpose. Then,
something happens. The requirements change, and then the
community feels the need: “Okay. This doesn’t apply. This
doesn’t address the current needs. So we need to change that.”
There is discussion and consensus, and the implementation lies
on the RIR.
Often, the RIR is the Secretariat for these communities. They
don’t develop the policies. They implement the policies
developed by their communities.
And then it’s a cycle. You come back again. Times change, and
then you review the policies to see if they still satisfy the needs
of the actual times.
If you can again…
We will see that, yeah, during the regional updates, the topics
change according to the regions’ needs in five different
communities. But also, the policy development processes and
the mechanisms in detail also are different according to the
needs of that region and how they communicate and how they
gather together and what kind of tools they use.

Page 5 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

There’s that regional zest in there, but the principles are shared.
Those principles since the beginning have been communicated
all the time. It’s open. So what you need is actually to be part of
these communities. There’s no membership registration, per se.
Nobody will allow or disallow you to take part in that. All you
need is your interest. If you’re interested in the policies around
these resources, which are in fact [commonwealth], right? They
are part of inheritance of this world; it belongs to not only one
person, but they are for all of us – you can take part.
Often what you need is just an e-mail address. So you don’t even
have to be in a meeting, a specific meeting, a face-to-face
meeting. In RIPE’s case, for example, we don’t even make
decisions in face-to-face meetings. Face-to-face meetings are
just another facility that is out there for people to communicate
and collect feedback. Final decisions are always going through
the comments that are collected in the e-mail mailing lists.
Transparency is an important principle, again. Here comes the
documentation. Since the beginning, the policies and the
development [inaudible] the mechanisms, plus what the policies
actually entail. They’re all documented out there. You can even
see the history of development, what happened from one time
to another and what’s changed.

Page 6 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

And, again, the bottom-up process – and this is exactly what
we’re talking about, why it is regional: because you really get
into the grassroots there – ISPs, IXPs, business people who are
actually affected through these policies. They are there making
these policies and taking part in there.
The decision-making is based on rough consensus. This is an
interesting topic since the beginning of time: what is consensus?
It’s often confused with voting. It is not voting. The best way I
could have explained this in the past, and still can explain what
consensus is, especially a rough one, is that whatever the
discussion point put there is coming from a need. First of all, you
recognize that. Somebody made a proposal because they need a
change. The current policy has a hole, or it doesn’t work for
them.
Once that proposal is put, the rest of the audience, the rest of
the community, is asked: can you live with this change? If people
can live with this change, then it is consensus. They might not
like it, but for the greater good, if they feel it is okay or others to
benefit from it, that is what we call rough consensus.
Yes, please, Carlos. Next slide.
Then we’ll shift from regional to global, when things become
global. All right. Global policies are about mainly the distribution

Page 7 of 57

EN

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

of these critical resources – IP addresses and AS numbers – in
blocks from IANA to the RIRs.
That is global because all the RIRs are subject to the same kind
of policy. That is important. And they need to be the same and
identical.
The way they are developed is still regional. Every community
discusses it in their own region. If they can come with a relatively
similar policy – the A to Z, the input to output relation is the
same – then it goes towards the facilitators, and that is the NRO
and then the ASO AC, where we advise the ICANN Board.
Eventually it gets implemented by ICANN as the body holding
the IANA function. Of course, there are being changes around
there, too, but the principle will stay the same.
Next slide, please.
Who we are, finally. We are 15 people right at the moment sitting
at the Council. We do not make policy. We are the bridge from
our

regional

communities

towards

ICANN,

mainly

for

engagement.
We also select two individuals towards the ICANN Board, Seats
#9 and #10. We advise the ICANN Board where necessary,
regarding resource allocation policy in conjunction with the RIRs
and the NRO. And we coordinate the global policy side, as you

Page 8 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

have seen. Regionally developed policies, before they can
become global, need to be going through some checkpoints,
and we are involved in that checkpoint.
We are 15 people, three coming from the five different regions.
You can see our faces and names in that link.
Next slide, please.
So this is the intro. If you have any questions right now about
how we are developing policy in our regions, like I said, it’s a
regional matter. All you need is an e-mail address. Come and
talk to us. We are here for the entire week, as well, until
Thursday. But the main thing is being involved through there,
where the policy is developed, and that’s the region.
So if you are having business in Europe, go talk to RIPE
representatives. If you have a business in the States, Northern
America, go talk to ARIN colleagues. If you have a business in the
rest of the world, like Africa, AFRINIC people are here. Fiona is
here. Mark – Fiona just walked in. APNIC and LACNIC as well.
I will just pause here if there are any questions or comments. We
want this to be interactive, but maybe after all it’s very clear
what is being said.
No? Okay. Next one up is Mark.

Page 9 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

MARK ELKINS:

EN

Thank you for this. Membership statistics – sorry. My name is
Mark Elkins. I’m from the AFRINIC region. I’m an ex-Board
member of AFRINIC. I’m now on the ASO as the AFRINIC Board
representative. I live in South Africa.
We recently had a meeting just a few weeks ago in Botswana,
but back to the statistics: 48 new members so far, and growth is
continuing to increase.
Next slide.
I’m going to go through the first few slides quite quickly. 6.4
million IP addresses allocated so far this year, and we’re getting
close to the end.
Next slide, please.
We still have a good number of resource members, which is
increasing, obviously, year by year. Incidentally, we also have
350-odd legacy space holders still left in the AFRINIC region.
Next, please.
AFRNIC is now the only RIR who can still allocate address space
according to additional policies. We have basically .7 remaining
before we get down to the last /8. We expect the soft landing

Page 10 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

policy to come into effect probably late towards the end of this
year.
We are focusing on things like IPv6 deployment, though. We
provide free training. There’s an IPv6 test best, etc., etc.
Next.
We have a number of policies which were discussed. Policy
Update number 1. I’m actually the sole author of this policy,
which was to allow for the transfer of resources in and out of the
region. Again, it’s been sent back to the general mailing list for
further updates and comments.
Next.
We have two soft landing proposals, which are in conflict with
each other, which makes for interesting times.
If we can go to the next slide.
These are the essentials of this particular policy. It is under
discussion still. It was basically opposed by members of the
other policy.
If we go to the next slide, we have the other policy. Although
they have very, very similar endgames, there is a soft landing
policy already in place, and both of these are trying to modify
certain aspects of the original soft landing policy that we have in

Page 11 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

place. So at the moment, that is the one that is in place for soft
landing at the moment. Whether any of these two will get
through, I’m still not sure. I’m also a co-author of this particular
policy.
Next slide, please.
There is another policy for the auditing of Internet number
resources so that, if people have resources which may or may
not be being used properly, as we are the last Regional Internet
Registry to actually have space, it does allow for perhaps
potentially nefarious activities in acquiring space from us, which
is the general reason for this policy, I believe.
Next.
One of the previous policy people put forth this policy, which is
to allow the resource transfer of blocks of IPv for addresses
within the AFRINIC region. It was well-received at the meeting,
but it was also proposed a bit late in the day, so this is under
discussion. I have a strong feeling that this will be passed by the
community, probably in November. But it was well-received.
Next.
I think this is the last policy, and this is inbound transfer policy,
where we’re hoping that we can take from the rest of the world
without having to give back. I understand that a similar policy

Page 12 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

was done in LACNIC and was pulled back eventually. Anyway,
there is inbound policy transfer to do this. I believe that this
would fit with RIPE but probably not ARIN, which is probably our
target at the moment. As dubious as to whether this will
actually, even if it passes, be useful to the AFRINIC region.
Next.
Training stats. So far we have one a number of trainings.
Obviously while we were in Botswana, there was training there.
Next.
And they’ll be some training in Johannesburg relatively soon. We
have our IPv6 certification program. I understand this is
relatively unique amongst the RIRs. There is a test bank of a
large number of questions, and at the end of the day, you
actually get a certificate for completing it. So these would be
tests, questions, that you would actually go through while being
moderated. You would be in sort of a classroom environment to
make sure that no cheating, etc., happened. We’re hoping that
that will be very successful.
Next.
Basically, lastly, our next AFRINIC meeting is in November. It’s in
this horrible location, a horrible little island in the Indian Ocean.
You don’t want to go there. It’s a beautiful place: Mauritius.

Page 13 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

I think that’s me. Next. Thank you very much.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thank you, Mark. One remark over there. I think we are starting
with AFRINIC just because of the alphabetical order among the
RIRs, so you were the first one to go.
I just want to make a remark. You mentioned a lot of transfers as
a keyword in the current policy proposals. I think that will be a
key in the other presentations, too. Can you just explain in two
minutes, one minute if you want, what soft landing policy was
for originally and what is being changed now?

MARK ELKINS:

The end of IPv4 address space globally has been looked upon a
bit like the sinking of the Titanic. No matter what happens, it’s
going to go down. So everyone has been rushing around, moving
the deck chairs, rearranging what can happen to give us more
time with IPv4.
One of the things that four out of the five RIRs has done is
institute something called a soft landing proposal, where a
portion, if not the whole, of the last block of IP address space
they got from IANA is treated differently from all other previously
allocated address space in such a way that perhaps address

Page 14 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

space is kept available for late entrances into the market, etc.,
etc. That would be the regions’ soft landing proposal.
Does that answer?

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Yes. I know we are here in a very closed environment, together
with a lot of Numbers folks, but there are few new faces I’m
seeing. So for their benefit, I wanted to get out a bit of our own
terminology and have an understanding of what the general
goal here is.
Thank you. Thank you. Let’s move on. I think next is on APNIC.
Tomohiro?

TOMOHIRO FUJISAKI:

Thank you, Filiz. I’m Tomorhiro Fujisaki from the APNIC region.
Here I’ll introduce – oh, sorry – recent APNIC policy activities. As
many of you know, APNIC also has two meetings in a year, and
these policies are discussed in the [inaudible], many on the first
day.
Here I introduce three policies recently discussed. Proposal
[105]. This policy proposal is to register more detailed others
[inaudible] database, but, yeah, this policy did not reach
consensus, and was withdrawn by others.

Page 15 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

The next two policies are introduced in detail in the next slide.
Next, please. Yes.
Proposal 114 and 113 – this was proposed at the same time. And
Proposal 114’s purpose is to modify the AS number criteria. This
policy modifies the eligibility [or] criteria for AS system numbers.
This policy proposed to remove the multi-home requirement.
Proposal 113 is to [hold] the IPv4 address. This proposal extends
the criteria for the [inaudible] IPv6 address assignment. Current
is this policy removes some criteria. Current criteria is multihomed or interconnected with other ISPs and the [inaudible]
alphabetize the received addresses in six months. Both policies
reached consensus and have been implemented already.
Next, please.
In the APNIC meeting, we discussed not only WHOIS policy
proposal, but the potential policy change. These three potential
policies were discussed in the recent APNIC meeting.
One is improving the APNIC WHOIS data quality. Actually, as
many of you know, the address community had this
[assignment] WHOIS database, and unfortunately, currently this
database is not so perfectly accurate. So we are discussing how
to make an accurate WHOIS database.

Page 16 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

Next is IP [inaudible]. As many of you know, there are some
commercial services that address your location. At the last
APNIC meeting, we discussed what APNIC [inaudible] WHOIS
database can do for this service. Also, [inaudible], we discussed
IP addresses [inaudible]. Actually, current IP address policy was
targeted to the ISPs, so maybe IoT and [inaudible] service will
need the policy. So we discussed this issue.
Next, please. Next slide.
This slide shows the recent discussion in the APNIC region.
Unfortunately, country policy discussion in APNIC is not so
active, so we are trying to increase the interest in the policy
activities.
Here I introduce two activities. One is policy [inaudible]
program. Here, policy [inaudible] to engage the local community
to this address, develop address policy development. Another is
policy deployment process. And the session we recently held in
the APNIC meeting, [that this year] to introduce the policy
deployment process and the policy proposals in the local
[inaudible]. As many of you know, APNIC had many, many
communities, and they have local [inaudible], so it’s very
important.
Next, please.

Page 17 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

This is the status of [inaudible] and the recordings of the
meeting can be heard from this URL. If you have interest, please
visit this URL. Thank you.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thank you, Tomohiro. I will follow up with LACNIC now. Ricardo,
I believe? Yes, you are next in line.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible] ARIN.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Oh, ARIN. I’m very sorry. I’m very sorry. I didn’t mean to. My A-BC is not being good. Right. Go ahead, Jason.

JASON SCHILLER:

Recent policy developments in the ARIN region.
Next slide. If you go back one slide, please.
I didn’t want to bore you with particular policy numbers and the
individual details of the different policies. Instead, I want to talk
about the two main topics that are under discussion that all
these policies are about. The first is justified need versus an
open market, and the second is policy simplification.
Next.

Page 18 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

The supporters of justified need basically believe that the RIRs
have a role in providing stewardship and that the number
resources are a shared resource for the community and that
they need to be conserved and used efficiently. And they should
be equally available to those who need them.
Number resources have been given out fairly based on justified
needs since the RIRs have started, and now that the ARIN free
pool is depleted, resources are scarce, and stewardship is more
critical than it’s ever been.
There’s concerns that an open market would concentrate IP
address in companies with the deepest pockets, with services
that make the most revenue per IP address, and not a single
competitor is a market segment could have more IPv4
addresses, and therefore outlive all of its competitors in that
market. This would reduce competition and provide an unfair
competitive advantage.
Next slide.
The other side of the coin is that the people that support an
open market basically feel like an open market is the most
efficient way to distribute IP addresses. Only people that need IP
addresses would by them. Supply and demand would set the
price properly. The Internet resources would continue to be
available to those who are willing to pay for them.

Page 19 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

There’s also some concerns about cornering the market. The
supporters of the open market feel like you really couldn’t
corner the market or get enough address base to manipulate the
pricing to your advantage.
And there’s a belief that the justified need really made sense
when ARIN was giving out the addresses from the ARIN free pool,
and they weren’t charging specifically for the resources. But now
that the free pool is empty, we can simply use an open market to
allow the IPs to get distributed.
They also note the fact that people are transferring IP addresses
out of ARIN policy. Some organizations are buying a future in
addresses, where they will pay someone who’s holding
addresses to continue to hold them for them, and then, when
they have justified need under the ARIN policy, transfer in
addresses.
There’s also some leasing arrangements, where some people
will continue to hold the IPs but charge monthly fees for another
organization to use them.
There are also just transfers that are done outside of the ARIN
policy. These are not reflected in the WHOIS database.
The biggest argument for an open market is that the value that
ARIN provides is uniqueness and registration of the resources,

Page 20 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

and, because people are making transfers outside of ARIN
policy, they’re not being reflected in the WHOIS. This is a
problem because now the database in not accurate in terms of
who is actually using the addresses.
Next slide.
Policy simplification. This basically comes in a coupe variations.
The first is a separation of transfer policy from the normal ARIN
allocation and assignment policies. Today, the transfer policy
references a lot of the requirements that are in the ARIN
allocation and assignment policy.
One of the approaches is to try to separate those two apart.
What that will enable us to do is more easily simplify the transfer
policy without affecting or interfering with the ARIN allocation
and assignment policy.
The idea also is that all of that text will be in one place, so
there’s no referential – there’s no going back and forth to try to
figure out what other requirements to transfer and address.
There’s also an effort to try to make the process more
predictable, and, finally, an effort to loosen justified need or
remove it all together.
The third piece of it is, is IPv4 effectively done at this point? The
ARIN free pool is empty. They’re virtually not making any more

Page 21 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

allocations and assignments. There’s a very long waiting list that
potentially will take any addresses that become available.
So can we just remove the IPv4 policies altogether, or can we
simplify them and take out some of the text regarding particular
corner cases?
I have some slides next about the actual policies that are
available. You can follow that URL to actually read the proposed
policies, and there’s also an ARIN 37 policy report which details
the outcomes of our previous ARIN meeting.
I’ve got a few more slides that actually detail the policies, but I’m
not going to go into them at this time.
Next. Yeah, these slides are just here for your reference to look at
some of the recent policy developments.
Next.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thank you, Jason. I guess that was your cue from – sorry. Thanks
for the little ring work. Right. Now, this time you really you,
Ricardo, for the LACNIC update. I wonder if you’re going to use
the word “transfers,” too. [inaudible].

Page 22 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

RICARDO PATARA:

EN

Yeah. Thank you, Filiz. My name is Ricardo Patara. I am the ASO
AC representative from the LACNIC region.
First slide.
There’s some information Filiz already mentioned, also every
RIR. We have policy being discussed in the mailing list. LACNIC,
same thing. [inaudible] mentioned that the next LACNIC meeting
will be in San Jose, Costa Rica, on September 26th-30th. It’s the
second LACNIC meeting this year. The first one was in May.
Next slide.
Some of the recent discussions. We had discussions about IPv6,
and also, as Filiz mentioned, the PIv4 transfer and some
proposals regarding the termination phase. LACNIC had its IPv4
pool depleted completely in July 2014. After this date, LACNIC
has two pools. The first one allows allocation up to /22 in six
months. When this pool is finished, the next one will be in place
that would allow only one /22 to new organizations. This is the
termination phase we have in the LACNIC region.
Next slide.
These are two recent proposals that were approved during this
LACNIC meeting in May. The [inaudible] completed the last call
period and is now at the Board for [inaudible]. The first one is to
remove a limitation. When end users’ organizations request

Page 23 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

IPv6, now it’s limited to a /32. Once this policy proposal is in
place, they will be able to request larger blocks if they can just
[file] for them.
The other one is also to remove some part of the requirements
for IPv6 allocation for our ISPs. There were some documents
that the authors and also the community saw that were not very
important in order to identify the need for IPv6, so these
documentation requirements were removed, according to this
proposal. And it’s implemented.
Next slide.
I also mentioned here some policy discussions that were
presented but not approved during this last LACNIC meeting.
They are in the discussion process, again, in the mailing list.
The first one is to allow a new type of organization. When an ISP
is trying to request IPv6, this new type of organization would be
governmental ISPs because, as per the author’s view, currently
this type of organization could not request larger blocks based
on the text. So the author would like to have a new type of ISP
identification in the IPv6 policy.
The next one is to remove criteria for IPv4 allocation. When ISPs
are multi-homed, they have more than one upstream provider.
The requirements are easy compared to the case when they

Page 24 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

have only one upstream provider. According to the author, there
are regions with small ISPs only have on option of upstream
providers, so the things have gotten complicated for them to
request IPv4 allocation.
Next slide.
There was also discussion to create a new IPv4 pool for the
termination phase, especially reserved for critical infrastructure
operators. Currently, this type of an organization can request
IPv4 from the termination phase, but there are other things that
would be valid. You have a special pool only for this type of
operators. So this is something that’s in discussion also in the
region.
Next slide.
This last slide is just information on other topics that were
already discussed in LACNIC. Some of them are already in place.
One of them was to increase the size of one of the pools that I
mentioned before, the pool that allows allocations up to /22 in
six months. Initially it was /11. As LACNIC was receiving IPv4
address from IANA from the recovered pool – part of this address
pool was only reserved for new organization, so the authors
thought that maybe it would be valid to move part of this
address space to this special pool. So this is implemented now.

Page 25 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

There was the IPv4 intra-RIR transfer, so allowing transfers
inside the LACNIC region. This policy was already in the text, but
it was inactive. So this proposal was to activate these policies
already place since last March.
Also, related to transfer, there was a proposal to only allow IPv4
transfer of blocks that are allocated for more than three years to
allow speculations of new allocations.
Next slide. I think this is it. Thank you.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thanks, Ricardo. Finally, I’m turning to Nurani for the RIPE
update before we turn for the implementation phase to Oscar.
Thank you.

NURANI NIMPUNO:

Thank you. My name is Nurani Nimpuno. I work for Netnod, but
I’m here representing the RIPE region in the ASO AC. I’m here to
give you a little update on the policy developments in the RIPE
region.
As Filiz has already explained, this is an ICANN policy meeting,
but this is not where the IP address policy takes place. They take
place in the regional communities. I thought I’ll just put this slide
up here because it’s a little bit confusing for those who are not

Page 26 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

familiar with the RIPE and the RIPE NCC and what the difference
is between RIPE and RIPE NCC.
The RIPE NCC is actually the Regional Internet Registry, simply
the Secretariat for the RIPE community. But it is in fact the RIPE
community who develops policies that apply to Internet
resources – IPv4, IPv6, and AS numbers.
Next slide, please.
Just like others have explained, these policies guide the usage of
IP addresses, and they’re done in working groups. As Filiz also
explained, although we have these face-to-face meetings twice a
year, all the discussions are always taken to the mailing lists so
that anyone can participate in the discussions, whether or not
you can come to the meetings. There’s actually even now a new
way of interacting with these discussions that I’ll get to.
It’s important to understand that, although the RIPE NCC is a
membership-based organization, you don’t have to be a
member to participate in these policy discussions.
Thank you.
I really like the categorization that Jason did for the ARIN region.
I could say for the RIPE region that there’s a similar division of
discussion points, so to speak. One is transfers. For this, it’s
important as well, for those of you not familiar with the

Page 27 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

numbers, the management of IP addresses, to understand that
IP addresses in the past were not sold and bought the way
domain names were. So it was considered a common resource
that we should all share and manage.
Clearly, now that we’re more or less out of IPv4 addresses, the
transfer policies are there to make sure that we strike the right
balance in managing these last resources. A big focus there is
also making sure that the registrations in the public databases is
correct.
I would say that the next hot topic in the RIPE region is how we
manage these last resources. Just like ARIN and APNIC and
LACNIC, the RIPE NCC are now down to their last /8, so that’s a
last 16 million-chunk of addresses. Before this happened, the
RIPE community said, “We need to then change the policies to
make sure that the last chunk of addresses are distributed in a
fair way and lasts as long as possible, so to speak.”
Interestingly, at the last RIPE meeting, which took place in May,
there were two contradictory proposals. Currently, if you are an
LIR, which is a member of an RIR, you can get one /22. That’s
1,024 addresses. And that’s it. You’ll get no more, no less, and
that is what you need to use to survive, so to speak.
This first proposal, 2015-05, actually proposed that a member of
the RIPE NCC could get a new /22 – that’s another 1,000

Page 28 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

addresses – every 18 months. In fact, there was another
counterproposal, in some ways, called Locking Down the Final
/8 Policy, which argued the opposite, that you should only have
one /22 allocation, regardless of how that has been received.
These two proposals were discussed, and then it was decided to
have a general discussion about how we best manage this last /8
that the RIPE NCC holds. There were no decisions to change the
current policy, but I think this still means that we will have many
of these discussions in the coming meetings as well. Have we
struck the right balance? We need to make sure these addresses
last as long as possible and give new entrants the possibility to
run their businesses.
But at the same time, these are the very last IPv4 addresses we
have, so matter what policies we make, we will eventually run
out.
I’d say the last category of discussion topics was really about
database registration accuracy. For example, there was one to
include a [inaudible] policy on the legacy addresses – the old
addresses that were allocated a long time ago – and also
introduce a way of authenticating objects have been registered
in other Internet routing registries. These are databases that
register routing information that people then use to send traffic
across the Internet. So those were those.

Page 29 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

It might just be interesting to know that, across the region, this is
an indication of who participates in this policy development.
Finally, I just wanted to mention that, since the very, very early
days, all these discussions in the RIPE community took place
over mailing lists. They still do, and for some reason, some of us
are still very fond of this way of discussing.
But it’s also very encouraging to see that the RIPE NCC is trying
to find new ways to allow new people to interact with the
community. So this RIPE forum is a web-based interface that
interacts with the mailing lists, but it’s a little bit more modern
for you young folk out there. You know who you are.
Next slide, please.
And it looks a little bit like this. So it gives the option as to how
you want to participate. You get pretty pictures and little bit
more color than a text-based e-mail. I know some of you are very
uncomfortable with that.
Okay. Well, that was it from the RIPE region. Thank you very
much.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thank you, Nurani. Yes, there are some [inaudible] service
[inaudible] communicate with forum introductions and mailing
lists being combined with forums and meetings. And there is

Page 30 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

now the implementation side. So the community develops
policies. We discuss topics. We tell sometimes contradicting stuff
to our RIRs on how things should be done or what we think.
Then they end up with having to implement these in a workable
way.
At this point, I will leave it to Oscar to tell us how they manage to
do that.

OSCAR ROBLES:

Thanks, Filiz. This is the NRO update. How can I control the
slides?

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

[inaudible].

OSCAR ROBLES:

Okay. Next one, please. I didn’t pay attention to that. Next,
please. Thank you. This is what I’ve been talking about in the few
minutes. Next.
The NRO is a lightweight, unincorporated organization. It aims
to coordinate the work among the RIRs. It is run by the Executive
Council, which is composed of the five CEOs of the RIRs. Most of
the activities are carried out by the coordination groups.

Page 31 of 57

EN

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

Next, please. These are the areas where we are trying to focus
for the past months. So far, we have defined coordination
groups for the engineering, which is the ECG, and the
Communication Coordination Group, also, and the Registration
Services Coordination Group. We had in the past the Public
Affairs Coordination Group.
Next, please.
Currently, the Executive Committee is composed, as I
mentioned, by the five CEOs of the RIRs. I am the current Chair of
the NRO EC. It is on a rotational basis. Since 2013, we have a
permanent Secretariat, and it is run by German Valdez. Also, the
activities for the Secretariat are supported by one of the
registries. This year, it’s ARIN – and the coordination groups that
I was mentioning before.
Next, please.
The NRO finances are very simple. For the NRO, most of our
expenses are depending on the contribution to ICANN which is
permanent at $823,000 U.S. annually. That includes already the
new SLA. That won’t change with the new SLA. Of course, the IGF
contribution,

the

communications

among

the

different

coordination groups, and the NRO EC, and the staff costs for the
Executive Secretary.

Page 32 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

The budget is shared proportionally based on the revenue by
every one of the RIRs. Recently, last year in 2015, we established
a joint RIR Stability Fund, which consists of some pledges made
by the five RIRs. It aims to contain any financial increases in one
of the RIRs, in case there’s some changes that may prevent that
registry to have access to financial resources. We define the rules
under which that registry may have access to those resources.
You may see the policies for the use of this fund in this link.
Next, please.
One of the main jobs of the NRO is to coordinate reports from
different topics, like the coordinated statistics for the five RIRs
and the comparative policy overview.
Next, please.
The governance matrix, the different practices to elect Board
members, the Bylaws for every RIR, the regional and PDP policy
development process, etc.
We have also included RIR accountability questions and answers
in this link. We also conducted, for the last 12 months so far, a
joint RIR independent accountability assessment. That helps us
to identify areas where we want to reduce some risks to the
accountability and transparency processes. Very soon we will
have a public report for this accountability assessment.

Page 33 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

Next, please.
Since you know, the five RIRs worked together to develop a joint
proposal. At first there were discussions among the five different
regions, and then the [inaudible] created these integrated
principles that led us to work in the SLA.
Finally, the SLA was discussed during all these months and
accepted by the NRO and ICANN. This is going to be signed in the
next hours on Wednesday with ICANN. But that will be in place
until the IANA and the Department of Commerce finish its former
relationship.
Next, please.
The NRO participates in different forums to deliver some of the
messages as RIRs or to conduct our work. Last year, we
participated at the IGF in Brazil. We also supported the IGF with
100 [KUS]. We keep NRO [booth], and we developed some
workshops and support other IPv6 best practices forums.
Last week we had the [short] presentation at the OECD
Ministerial on the Digital Economy, and also with the Ipv6 topics.
At this moment, we’re working on preparations for the NRO
participation at the 11th IGF, which will be in Guadalajara,
Mexico.
Next, please. That’s it. Thank you.

Page 34 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

FILIZ YILMAZ:

EN

Thank you, Oscar. I have a question before I open the floor. For
our final speaker, I’ll move to Lousewies. We keep hearing this
transfer policies, and we have some CEOs also there, sitting.
Paul Wilson, I’m addressing you now. So don’t make me repeat
the question.
As RIRs, I’m thinking maybe not as NRO. Is it on the NRO level or
RIR level? But there should be some kind of preparation now as
transfer policies are being developed in various regions. Do you
have some insights to share with us as an example, if you would
like to? Am I putting you on the spot now?

PAUL WILSON:

Yes.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Come to the mic.

PAUL WILSON:

Yeah, this is not a Dorothy Dix, is it? I actually missed how you
introduced the question, so I’m not sure what you’re asking. Is it
about coordination of transfer policies amongst the RIRs, or?

Page 35 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

FILIZ YILMAZ:

EN

Right. Yes. Not coordination, but in every region so far, we have
seen in the reports that RIR communities are discussing
transfers within their regions and between the regions. So I’m
guessing, as the RIR staff, you are monitoring these
developments because if they get accepted, it will induce some
implementation responsibilities on the RIRs. So I’m just asking if
there is preparation other than just one [during] now.

PAUL WILSON:

Well, luckily we’ve had a quite long and slow start on any kind of
major quantity of transfers, particularly RIR transfers, because
over the years, we’ve had one RIR, and then the next and the
next, run out of IPv4 and then institute transfers. Then we’ve had
the process of inter-regional transfers only occurring firstly
between our own and APNIC, and now with RIPE NCC as well.
So, yeah, there’s been a long process of planning, of design, or
working out what would be the stages of improved
implementation of transfers and automated implementation of
transfers and reducing any time downtime involved with
Reverse DNS resolution, for instance, or WHOIS lookups, and
importantly, RPKI as well. So at the moment we can’t say we’ve
got a single button transfer that makes all of that happen in one
go, and that’s actually quite a long way away. Whether or not we
ever need it will depend on how the right of transfers might

Page 36 of 57

EN

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

increase in the future. It’s pretty low now, and [I don’t really
know] what the expectations of the community are.
I hope that helps.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

It does. I think this is a good example of the manifestation of
how the market changes and then the policy developments in
the regions recognize those changes and respond accordingly.
So I just wanted to use it as a showcase, that while very
technical

resource-related

policies

may

be

diminishing

nowadays because there’s not much happening at the
technology level, but on the business side there are changes,
and that is still going on and having an influence on the policy
development.

PAUL WILSON:

If I could just add, in case we actually did end up in situation
where there was a high volume of transfers being conducted
between any pair of RIRs amongst the five, it would be quite a
challenge. That is something that we are preparing for in some
sense, an according to I think what we think the likelihood
would be.
Amongst the RIRs, there are several coordination groups of staff
who

Page 37 of 57

communicate

regularly.

In

particular,

there’s

an

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

Engineering Coordination Group that really looks after the
engineering, particularly of RPKI. That’s one of their inter-RIR
challenges at the moment. And there’s a Registration Services
Coordination Group. Both of those groups have been meeting
and discussing over the years, actually, as I say, as this situation
is developing and we’re seeing more and more. So it is an active
coordination amongst the five of us now. Thanks.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Any questions? Yes, there’s a remote participant. Carlos is also
monitoring the remote participants. Thank you.

[CARLOS REYES]:

Thanks, Filiz. There’s a question from [Lou Hang] in the Adobe
Connect chat. “Where is the joint RIR Stability Fund being kept?
In each RIR’s account with a mark of stability fund, or in a joint
bank account somewhere?”

OSCAR ROBLES:

It is kept in every RIR’s finances. It is just a pledge. In case there’s
a need to use it, that would be directed to the RIR requiring
those funds. But it’s in every RIR.

Page 38 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

FILIZ YILMAZ:

EN

Any further questions at this point? Oh, Nick you would like to –
you sat too far away from the mic, so now…

NICK:

Sorry. Just a couple of things. One, first of all, thank you for
pushing the RIPE forum. We work very closely with the working
group Chairs in developing that for the community.
The second thing I was wanting to ask APNIC. You have your
policy champions. I was curious to know about the community
involvement and how you find and vet these champions and
how successful the program is. Thank you.

TOMOHIRO FUJISAKI:

Thank you for asking, but, actually, the APNIC Champion
Program just started. Yes, we are now considering how to
implement or how to proceed with that program. Actually, at the
last APNIC meeting, some implementation report – sorry. Just
that it’s a not so concrete example that we have just now.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Same topic, right? Yes, please.

OSCAR ROBLES:

Last year, LACNIC implemented something similar to the APNIC
Champions. We call it the Policy Shepherds, which aims to help

Page 39 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

and support other ideas to produce a policy but are not that
knowledgeable in the process. These persons are appointed
from the previous moderators or Chairs of the policy
development processes. We have four or six of them in the
community, and they are volunteers to help others to produce
the policies.
It’s working so far. It’s working very well so far.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

That’s great. Thank you for creating a queue by the mic.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[inaudible]. I have a simple question for Mark. As you say,
AFRINIC is the only region IPv4 left. As we know AFRINIC actually
have the smallest IPv4 block. So do you have any plan to prevent
the people from going to AFRNIC to grab your IPv4 and put it
into a sale market?

MARK ELLISON:

As far as I am aware, apart from the existing policies on a needs
basis, etc., there are no additional policies or anything else to
stop space from being grabbed. So any legitimate request
should go through just fine. There’s nothing else special at the
moment.

Page 40 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

EN

Yeah. My question is because AFRNIC generally comes in later, so
if the Ipv4 is taken off and used in another place to sell it, then
it’s not very good for AFRNIC/Africa to develop IP addresses to
use. So that’s my question.

MARK ELLISON:

I’m sorry. I’m not catching everything you’re asking.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Okay. Got it. Do you want me to explain?

FILIZ YILMAZ:

I think the question is – and correct me if I’m wrong, [inaudible]
– IP number usage in Africa has been lowed compared to the
other regions so far, so in an event of transfer policies, Africa is
one of those regions where they will still have addresses, and the
other regions will not. So do you have a different focus in your
policy development for that, what will happen for the Africa
region, for the interest that you will receive from other regions?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Page 41 of 57

Yeah.

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

FILIZ YILMAZ:

EN

Is this part of your discussions, or are you just looking into how
to…

MARK ELLISON:

It’s not really being discussed, except there was the one policy
about properly investigating any suspicious previous allocations
or assignments to organizations that could therefore be audited
properly. But there’s nothing apart from that to better slow
down or stop or vet any applications.
Otherwise, I’m not a host master, so I can’t really answer that
question. But I know that the host masters at AFRINIC are taking
longer and longer to process applications because they’re doing
a lot more checking.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Okay.

[RON DA SILVA]:

Different topic.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Yeah. I guess there’s a response to that.

Page 42 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

[RON DA SILVA]:

EN

No, no, no. Not a response to that. Different topic, if that’s okay.
I’ve seen the ASO involvement here in ICANN for a number of
years, trying to identify what a good engagement model is for
this group of folks to participate and have impact. I think there’s
a great topic that is at hand, and unfortunately scheduled
concurrent with this session.
But nevertheless, there could be some follow-up, and for this
[last year’s group of folks to consider], and that is, especially
light of this whole conversation around IPv4 depletion and how
that impacts consumers and end users and providers, actually,
operating, and getting universal acceptance of v6 in place.
So there’s this whole discussion underway in ICANN about
universal acceptance, and it’s all about strings; funny different
characters, different languages, different new top levels, and
how that will interact technically with protocols and
applications.
I think just as important is the acceptance of IPv6. This is
probably a great intersection between this community and the
broader Names community. I think a shared goal, which is how
we make sure in the same way new strings are being accepted
that Ipv6 is being accepted.
So I would encourage this group to consider finding some way to
formally participate and impact that activity. Thanks.

Page 43 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

FILIZ YILMAZ:

EN

Thank you. Great feedback, Ron. On the floor I heard the same
thing. In this meeting, since it is the first meeting with this new
format, I think we are all a bit trying to find what’s going on
where and how this is going to happen. So hopefully next time
we will do a better job altogether. Thank you.
With that, I will turn to it over to Lousewies. She’s an ICANN
Board member now, for a while already, and NomCom-elected.
She’s been a politician in the past, and she’s very interested in
the Internet and technology as well. She’s being showing a lot of
attention to our topics recently, so we took the opportunity to
invite her here to hear her perspective for the time she spent
with the Numbers Community. I’m really curious as to what I will
hear.
She masters those speeches without [slides], so please go
ahead, Lousewies.

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: Thank you very much, Filiz. I’m really, really honored to be here,
I have to say, and it’s wonderful not just to get the update from
you guys but also the way that you’re building bridges with
people who don’t necessarily come from the Numbers
Community.

Page 44 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

I was elected by NomCom in October and I totally don’t come
from the Internet world at all. So as you can imagine, it was
quite a transition. The way I tend to describe it is it’s like landing
on an alien planet. Then it turns out there’s different planets on
the planet as well, or different species and everything else. So it
has really been fascinating.
I joined the Board in October with Ron da Silva, and with Lito
Ibarra. I said, “Where do I start with all this technical stuff going
on?” and they both said, “Oh, you have to start with the
Numbers because A) they’re the most important and B) they
have the nicest people.” So there we go. So I have been doing
that.
There’s of course, besides just my personal interests, the formal
relationship that you mentioned already. The ASO appoints two
Board members. Kuo-Wei and Ron are here, and the
replacement Kuo, Akinori, is right there, who has been elected
by you guys.
There is another formal relationship, which is that the ASO also
appoints someone to the NomCom, which appoints the
NomCom members of the Board. So there’s quite a lot of power
that you have to influence the leadership and the Board.
There’s something much more informal, which I think is actually
in many ways more important, which is that of course the Board

Page 45 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

is there to, besides help run the organization and steer the CEO,
serve the community. It’s something that I don’t know exactly
how it’s been done before. But I think that the key thing that I
see in this new Board is that this is going to be taken extremely
seriously.
One of the key ways of doing it is not only to meet each other
three times a year at this big ICANN members, but precisely for
Board members to go into the community, into your ecosystem,
to go to the RIPE meetings, to go to all the different meetings.
We can’t all fly all over the world all the time, but we should
definitely try to make an effort, especially in our own region, to
find out what’s going on and to learn these subject matters.
Now, rather than me explaining what I’ve tried to learn and then
probably mess it up and you think, “Oh, she needs to learn a lot
more,” there’s one thing I’ve really noticed which I think is
important, and this is because I have a political background. I
engage a lot with governments and with inter-governmental
organizations and with politicians.
I knew that I didn’t know a lot about the technical way the
Internet is run. A lot of politicians either don’t know or don’t
care, but they know even less, especially know that I’ve been
catching up a little bit – virtually nothing – about how the
Internet is run. And that is something extremely dangerous

Page 46 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

because politicians are faced every single day with pressure
about security, about terrorism, about pedophilia, about
everything that happens on the Internet. It can be business
related. It can be security related.
But these are serious questions, and if they don’t know how the
Internet is actually run at a technical level, because they’re not
engineers, then they’re going to use a sledgehammer to try to fix
one little thing, and it’s going to ruin the system.
One of the things I’ve been trying to cross-communicate – planet
politics, where I come from, need the technical expertise of
people like you to explain how they can actually solve the
problem without going too far. A lot of this is legitimate, but I
also admit that sometimes it will not be legitimate. Sometimes a
government knows exactly how the Internet works and will use
whatever – some so-called terrorist threat – as an excuse to shut
down the opposition or to take down critical Twitter feeds. Of
course that will happen as well.
But the more that the technical community is out there
explaining, “Well, if this is the problem you say you want to
solve, this is actually the way you can do it without bringing
down the system or without doing more damage or ruining the
things that make it work – the interconnectivity, the openness,

Page 47 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

the freedom; all the things that we stand for.” That will make it
much harder for these governments to follow that agenda.
So I’ve been at these meetings and saying, “Look, you guys. You
need to engage with politicians. You need to engage with
governments.” Then you get a lot of, “Uh, well…” Just as your
planet is new to me, a lot of I would say people I’ve met at the
various RIRs are not really keen to do this and say, “Well, our
politicians don’t understand, or they don’t care.”
But my plea to you is to keep trying, because this is going to get
worse in the sense that the pressure on governments and
politicians to get more control over the Internet has been
increasing and it’s going to keep on increasing. Unless we make
sure that, within this multi-stakeholder model but mostly also
within the outside world, who knows nothing about how these
things work, if we don’t get all their voices in, then that can
actually damage the kind of Internet that we stand for.
One of the personal things I’ve taken on is to try to build bridges
between Planet Internet or Planet Tech – whatever you might
call it; Planet Geek – and then Planet Politics/Planet
Government. I think that is really going to be crucial if we want
to keep the Internet working the way it is.
So that’s what I wanted to say. Of course, I’m available for
questions. I know I have a difficult name – Lousewies. The

Page 48 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

advantage is that, once you learn how to spell it, you can easily
find me on Facebook, on Twitter, on LinkedIn. But you can also
come get my business card. What? No, yes you can. I put a
pronunciation guide on the ICANN wiki. Also, I try to available.
I want to thank all the Numbers Community for being so
incredibly welcoming and warm and patient and explaining
again what a /22 is and how it works and explaining again why
this is important. I hope to take a quiz after my three years and
see if I actually learned it well.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Any comments? Remarks? We have eight more minutes
specifically for Lousewies. Am I saying that right?

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: Super.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Yeah? Okay. Or for the entire panel, even to the audience out
there?

WILFRIED WOEBER:

Wilfried Woeber, also on the ASO for the RIPE region. I’d like to
really comment on your last contribution. It’s also my personal
experience over the years that there is really a point in trying to

Page 49 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

cross the bridge and to try to understand the vocabulary, the
background, the pressure, and the expectation of these different
and sometimes separate parts of our world.
The one thing that’s the reason why I’m standing in front of the
microphone and consuming your time: one of the things that I
found is that, in trying to make that exercise successful, you
have to find the proper layer, let’s say, or the proper point of
attachment, because if you just talk widely and broadly about
politicians, they tend to come like the birds in spring and go
back in autumn. And then you start over again.
I think it is one of the advantages of our technical community
that there is some sort of stability around. My experience in that
comes mostly over the last couple years from interacting with
our government of our little country, Austria, with regard to
security and Internet management, not from a political level, but
from an operational and security level.
You have to build this mutual understanding and trust. It’s
sometimes difficult to find the layer where the stability is there,
where the interest is there, and where it is useful to spend the
effort. I’ve seen a couple of things where people tried to get in
contact at a very high level because this seemed to be the
proper point to interact. But then you’ll start over every other
year or something like that. Just for consideration. Thank you.

Page 50 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: I think this is a wonderful contribution, and I would just like to
point out that politicians come and go, usually very quickly, but
there is layer underneath, which is the civil servants, who tend to
be quite stable in many, many countries. I think, to build up
relationships there, especially if in your own country there is a
multi-stakeholder model and you have ISOC meetings or IGF
meetings or whatever, to make sure that that’s the place to
meet. Once you build up those relationships, then once
something happens, it creates a piece of legislation or some
politician shouting something. You already have the contacts to
go there and say, “Hey, this is what you don’t need to do, or, if
you want to solve this problem, you can do it this way.”
The second thing is: don’t underestimate what you can do in
public. When I was an elected member of Parliament – and I was
elected to the Dutch Parliament and to the European Parliament
– if I would be dealing with an issue and I would read a very good
newspaper article – it could be technical one saying, “Well, the
European Parliament is dealing with this legislation. This is a
problem they’re trying to solve. I am a technical expert and
would recommend A, B, and C” – the first thing I would do is call
up that person and say, “Can you please come brief me?”

Page 51 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

I think this is a way also to reach out, but it has then got to be
written in a way that non-techies understand it. But that’s easier
to do. This is just a great way to enter the policy debate. Before
you know it, you’ll be on T.V., explaining to the politicians what
they need to be doing. That’s exactly what we need: to get some
experts into the debate.

LOUIE LEE:

Hi. Louie Lee. Thank you very much for coming. We get a fairly
regular request from the ICANN Board, from GAC governance on
how they can help with various things, like IPv6 deployment.
“Should we do a mandate?” Do you get a sense of how the
message is being received, what message is being sent, or how
it’s being interpreted, and what they are doing, if they actually
take the advice of, say – just an example: one way, maybe a
government can say that, for its own purchasing, all new
equipment must support IPv6 and for some definition of
support, whether it’s in hardware or software or whatnot.
Do you get a sense that any of that advice is being taken,
received, understood in any way, if that’s actually working?

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: The short answer is I don’t know. The long answer is that I think
it differs greatly per country. And not even every country is in the

Page 52 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

Governmental Advisory Committee here, which works together
with ICANN. Sometimes you would have one person who then
has to be the government person for the Netherlands of
whatever.
So this is a huge, huge workload. The people who are involved in
ICANN may not always be the ones who are then at technical
level trying to work the governments there. But I think it’s a
wonderful question.
One of the ideas of this policy forum, having a B Meeting, is
precisely to cross-fertilize between the different silos. I think this
is exactly the kind of question that you guys should be asking
the GAC. You’ll have a joint meeting with them at some point?
Well, then maybe at the next B Meeting, this may be something
to do.
I just came from a meeting this morning, which was basically a
technical briefing for the GAC, where people were explaining to
them how domain names worked. It was just a discussion about
having country codes in the second level. Some countries think
that is an absolute disaster and should be forbidden and that
country codes should be only for countries, even at the second
level.
Others are saying – the Netherlands, for example, have this
wonderful example of de.nl – “de” being the German country

Page 53 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

code, and DE also being a Dutch coffee company, [inaudible]. It’s
never been a problem.
But then it’s nice to get the technical people together with the
governmental people and saying, “Hey, is this really a problem
or not?” This is precisely the kind of place, ICANN, where we can
start doing this. Then you can ask the question to the people
who actually know.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thank you. Just a short notice – thank you – for the answer. We
have only two minutes, and probably we have to clear out the
room. So if you can, keep it brief.

CRAIG NG:

Very quickly. Craig Ng, APNIC, but speaking for myself. I just
want to say, Lousewies, thank you very for coming, and thank
you very much for your support. Speaking for myself and having
worked on the SLA, I just want to say how truly appreciative we
are of the Board’s support through this whole process and how
grateful we are that we have finally reached where we have
reached. So thank you very much.

Page 54 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: I think all the credit for the SLA goes to Ron over there, so I’m
just going to bat that right over there.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Hi, Lousewies. I’m [cheating]. I’m Dutch as well, so I actually
know how to announce it. No, I don’t get brownie points for that
one.
Thank you for your honest feedback, as one alien to another
shows the way. I would love to be able to educate me some civil
servants and politicians. If only I’d know where to find them in a
way where I don’t get immediately written off as some sort of
badly-organized lobbyist. If you could show us some direction in
that sense, that would be highly appreciated. Thank you.

LOUSEWIES VAN DER LAAN: I think that’s great. This of course is going to be totally different
at every national level. I think you really blend in pretty well. No
pony-tail, no beard, no shorts. Because this kind of stuff scared
civil servants. They’re like, “Who are these people?” It is about
learning each other’s language and trying to blend in, and
wherever I can personally help to build bridges in the
Netherlands, I will. But it’s going to take a lot more than just one
country or one region. This is something we have to do globally
and we’ll all work together. And maybe keep on being in touch

Page 55 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

EN

and exchanging experiences are good examples of how we can
build the bridges.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

All right. One last remark. Maria, go ahead.

MARIA HALL:

Thank you very much. Maria Hall. I am a member of the Board of
the RIPE NCC. That’s why I’m here. [inaudible]. I just want to say
that I was a former Swedish rep in the GAC. I was engaged in the
RIPE NCC and the RIPE community in 2004, when I started.
I have to say that RIPE NCC is doing a great job, so I just want to
say thank you for doing this because you have the Coordination
Working Group, which is actually a forum for trying to interact
between governments and the technical community.
And obviously you have this round table meeting, so there are
many ways you can make platforms or forums to interact
between these sectors. So you’re doing a great job. Thanks.

FILIZ YILMAZ:

Thanks, everyone. Maybe at the next ICANN meeting we need to
find a forum to talk together as well, like you said.
Thank you. Thanks, everyone, for your time and being here until
the [bitter] end.

Page 56 of 57

HELSINKI – ASO-NRO Public Session

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 57 of 57

EN

