EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 09:15 to 13:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

DAN YORK:

…a little bit. We had, I know, no coffee, nothing.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Yeah. Ohh, yes, we’re in a room full of geeks. Yes, okay. Good
morning. I’m Dan York. As many of you know, and were here for
a day of the DNSSEC workshop and Tech Day combined in one,
as part of this new format. I’m delighted to see this many
people. We were seriously concerned about whether we would
be talking to ourselves today.
But it’s good to see, we kind of are, okay, but there is more
people here. There is other folks. It’s good. Okay. Before we
begin, we have a couple of little logistical things. All of you will
see the things here, what we’re talking about today, you also
need to have one of these. All right? If you want to have lunch
today. We have only so many slots. There are ushers who will
not let you in if you don’t have one of these.
We kind of spread them around, so if there is not one right with
you, grab the other part, hold on to it, do whatever you want to

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

do with it, put it away, but you need to have this ticket to get in
there. And when it gets closer, Julie will explain how to get
there, because she and Kathy…
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Yes, but they’ve walked it. They have stuff to tell us about what
we should really know. Which elevator door to get into and not,
and those kinds of things. Okay. Slides and audio stream are at
this link. Okay.
If you’re in the room you probably don’t need that, but we do
have remote participants. We have a number of people on
there. So when you are speaking, please do state your name,
etc., because we do have people who are on remote, can see
what’s on the camera. All right. It’s aimed at you guys. There
we are.
So this is the program committee that’s brought people
together. I would like, the folks who are on this list, could you
stand? Jacques? Mark? A couple of people who are here, Russ?
Okay, Andre? Okay. So these are the folks who have been
helping put this program together. We meet weekly on a call.
And so if you want to thank them, or blame them, you can.
And also if you would like, if you’ve got an idea for next time in
Hyderabad, talk to one of the folks who are here too. We’d like

Page 2 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

to do a little bit more about that. We’d like to thank our four
sponsors that are here. And I saw, we have Jacques again, from
dot CA, and I saw Cristian. Cristian? There he is, from SIDN. And
[inaudible], anybody from [inaudible] in here? No, okay.
Anybody from Affilias? Yeah, Jim. Right back there. Thank you
Jim. So we’d like to thank these four companies who have come
together to offer sponsorship. They’re sponsoring the lunch,
and this time, they’re also sponsoring the implementers’
gathering.
[APPLAUSE]
So, speaking of that, no.

That wasn’t it.

That would be

tomorrow night, and if you don’t know, it’s at a nearby
restaurant. If you don’t know about the information about how
to get there, talk to us, and we can tell you where to go. Julie is
about to say something.

JULIE HEDLUND:

I’ll just note that is a limited space thing. So we’ve got a few
slots left, if you haven’t RSVP’d, please do send me an email, and
so I can send you the information of where it is. But just, we
wouldn’t be able to accommodate everybody in this room, just
so you know. Thank you.

Page 3 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DAN YORK:

Thank you Julie for pointing us back to the budgetary track,
since we have a limited budget to pay for that. Anyway, we want
to thank our… And I had to do that because the cameras synch
to the nearest microphone, that’s why I did that. Okay.
This is a project of the Security and Stability Advisory
Committee. A number of the members are throughout here, also
with the assistance of the Internet Society, the [Deploy 360?]
Program. And you’ve seen the program that we have. We are
going to… I’m going to do my normal discussion of the counts
and things. And then you can see next we’ve got Dr. Matthäus
Wander, who is right over there, yes.
Okay. He’s going to talk to us about some of the measurements
he has done around DNSSEC adoption. And then we’ve got
Geoff to talk about, back in the back there, to talk about his
ongoing measurements of validation side. Then we’ve got a
panel that Russ here will be monitoring, which is going to be
talking about different challenges to DNSSEC deployment, ways
people have dealt with that, that kind of thing. And then we’ve
got a, Matt Larson is here, yes, there is Matt, to talk about, and
Duane, who is sitting next to him over there, are going to talk
about the key signing key, the KSK rollover process and where
we are with that.

Page 4 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And then Andre, Suri and I will come up and talk a bit about
encryption agility, and the migration to new encryption
algorithms. And then Russ and I will wrap this up, and then
Roy… Is Roy here? He will be here, okay. Roy will take us
through the great DNS and DNSSEC quiz. How many people are
at their first DNSSEC workshop?
Okay. Cool. Welcome. Welcome to this. You’ll…
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
No, their first, not the first. Their first. Okay, you’ll get to
experience the great DNS DNSSEC quiz. Now one thing you will
notice that is missing from this schedule is a break, but if you’ll
notice the new schedule that ICANN has, there is part one and
part two. We had to do that because we were mandated that we
should respect the break as part of the schedule to that. Then
we went ahead as a program committee and ignored that
entirely and just ran anyway.
So you are invited… We don’t expect you to sit here the entire
time without caffeine or other types of things, so you are
certainly invited to get up, during the break time, or other times,
and get something when it’s out there. So you are welcome to
do that, we will not be offended. Go right ahead.

Page 5 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Okay, so I want to talk a bit about the deployment that we’ve
seen, the rates that we’re seeing around this. And this is one
map that Geoff Huston’s team produces, showing the level of
validation that is occurring globally. And when Geoff comes up,
he can maybe explain the dips, but we know it’s the measuring
mechanism he uses with the add mechanisms, etc.
But basically what we’re seeing is, overall around 14% validation
happening

globally

measurement.

right

now,

according

to

Geoff’s

And he’ll talk more about that in a few.

Another… When we look at the regions that are here, you can
see the different areas of the world that have more validation
than others, and some of those might be surprising if you look at
some of the, where they are. You’ll notice that other column, it
says, use Google’s PDNS, public DNS, that’s the 8.8.8 and
associated IPv6 addresses and such.
And we put that column on there because if there is a higher
percentage of that, that means many of the countries, many of
the areas, are doing validation through Google’s services. If
there is a lower percentage, such as North America and Northern
Europe, that means that more of the ISPs are doing the
validation themselves in that space.
So interesting stats there. This was the Google, or this was the
European one, since we’re coming to Europe, that I put up here.

Page 6 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

You can see some of the places like Farrell Islands, 91%
validation. So there is DNSSEC validation happening in different
parts of the space, near Sweden, right next door, at 77%.
Norway, 62%. So it’s great to see this growth as we’ve seen over
time of DNSSEC validation happening out there in many ways.
Switching to the signing side, this is Rick Lamb’s report showing
the DNSSEC deployment of domains, and that big, huge, hockey
stick like thing is, of course, because of all of the new gTLDs that
we’re seeing there.
But, you know, a very high percentage of that. Rick has started
tracking, and this goes, this is for the TLDs for which he can get
statistics, he is showing the percentages of, or the number of
signed domains and the percentages, and you’ll notice that of
the ones he’s tracking, we have dot NL, is up on the top there
with the largest number of signed domains, followed by Brazil,
com, etc., and going on down that list.
So we’re seeing some, you know, continued good deployment
on the signing side. This is the second level domains. And Matti
is going to talk a bit more about that in a few, when he comes up
here. I was also going to point out, on the new gTLD slides, and I
don’t know how many of you are aware there is a site called
NTLD stats dot com, and they have a page specifically on
DNSSEC, which shows the number of domains that are there,

Page 7 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

and the [piece?] that are there, but if you look at some of the
new gTLDs and where the signing is happening, [O-V-H?] is…
Anybody have an [O-V-H] domain here? Okay. Yes, it’s a domain
that was setup and they do the hosting, they do the signing, they
do all sorts of things on there, and they have that. But then one
that I thought was interesting was number eight here, dot bank,
what’s interesting about that one is 100% of the domains are
signed because their business model is actually includes the fact
that when you get a dot bank domain, they automatically do the
signing and that’s all part of that.
So it’s interesting just to see, we’re seeing a couple of these
newer domains that are embracing this. Dot insurance is doing
the same kind of thing as well. Moving into our maps, and
looking into our country pictures, and some things that have
changed since we were last together in Marrakech, this is our big
view of the world in terms of where the ccTLDs are signed, and
I’ll come into a little particular issue with this when we talk
about the Middle East.
The maps are showing, this is the two letter ccTLDs that are
shown here, and which are signed. And so right now, you see a
lot of the coverage. Obviously, Africa is still a little bit, needs to
be filled-in in some parts of that, but let’s take a look at this.

Page 8 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Africa, again, we’ve had a couple since the last time. One was
Morocco signed their dot MA, and Madagascar signed dot MG.
So and we know from some of the workshops that are
happening that there is still work in various parts to fill-in that
map and get more of those ccTLDs signed as well. On AsiaPacific, we had a couple of interesting ones. Syria signed their
dot SY. And that’s now active. And Saudi Arabia signed their
IDN. And so you’ll notice, though, that they’re still yellow in the
map there, they’re in the announced state, which means we
know they’re interested in that, and that’s because they haven’t
actually signed dot SA.
And I was having a discussion with the folks there, sorry, my
system is set for the two-letter country codes, and maybe if I had
somebody, any Python developers want to help me work on this,
we can maybe look at how to tweak the maps to also
incorporate IDNs. But I don’t have the cycles yet to do that, but
anyway, we should note that Saudi Arabia is on this path where
they have signed their IDN, and they are looking to sign dot SA,
they hope by the end of the year.
Moving on, on Europe, we had Romania come in with dot RO, in
the past few months there. And in Latin America, picture is as in
Marrakech, and so is North America, which, anyway. These
maps are available. You can get them off the Internet Society’s

Page 9 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

[Deploy 360] site, and you can sign-up and get them every
Monday morning. They get shipped out automatically.
We have an event calendar which we haven’t been populating as
much, but we’re trying to maintain that on the DNSSEC
deployment site, if you’ve got a DNSSEC site ordain, or DNS
security event you’d like us to list, please let me know. I’ll be
glad to do that. I also point out that… Who is going to be at the
ITF in Berlin? Okay, a good number of folks here. Well, if you
want to come a couple of days early, and you want to be part of
the Hack-a-thon that’s on the Saturday and Sunday, there is a
group of us who will be working on DNS, DNS security, DNS
privacy tools, etc.
And the past couple of sessions, we’ve had some good work
there, working on doing things with TLS and some other
different pieces that are a part of that. And we have a DNSSEC
history project. I’m still looking for volunteers to help me collate
this and put this into a form that’s more readable, and work on
that. I would love to have any volunteers with that. And my final
slide is to mention that, just this past week, anybody see the
Global Commission on Internet Governance’s One Internet
Report?
Okay, a few people nodding. This is a work… The Global
Commission on Internet Governance was created two years ago

Page 10 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

in 2014, and has a whole, about, 29 different people from around
the world, chaired by Sweden’s former Prime Minister, Carl Bildt.
And has been doing, producing this whole series of reports.
I think, actually, Patrik, you had a report come out from them,
right? Patrik had a report come out and was involved in that
and things, and they put together this final document, because
the Commission only went for two years. It’s done now. It
ended its tenure as an entity. And they put out this report on
basically what their view is, this collection of people, experts in
the field, and others, around what we need to do for the
internet, and internet governance, internet policy, all of those
kinds of things.
And

I

wanted

to

point

out

that among

the many

recommendations. They did specifically call out DNSSEC, and
say, DNSSEC offers significant improvements to the current
security, even though it is currently being deployed. It’s not
happening quickly enough.

We all agree.

Accelerating its

adoption should be considered a high priority by DNS and
network operators. It’s essential that the internet technical
community’s ongoing promotion efforts, continues to support
operators with [the one?] of DNSSEC through the promotion of
capacity building programs, best practices, and guidelines.

Page 11 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So I just thought that was great the GSIG recommended that
DNSSEC was something that the governments of the world and
others should be paying attention to and working on. So, kudos
to that, and with that, I am going to wrap my stuff and just say,
any questions before we begin?
Okay, for speakers, Russ Mundy is sitting right here, and he will
be operating his little clock, which you can see right here, which
will show you how much time you have left.

So we are

endeavoring to keep on time. And let it be noted that I was one
minute and 53 seconds early.
[LAUGHTER AND APPLAUSE]
Do you want the microphone, or do you want to…?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

It’s up to you.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

All right.

Good morning everyone.

My name is Matthäus

Wander. I’m from the University of Duisburg-Essen in Germany,
and today I would like to present some measurements and
analysis about DNSSEC deployment on the service side. So how
Page 12 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

many signed domain names do we have? All right, so actually
we have three different studies here. The first one will be
DNSSEC signing at the top-level domains.
Second, it will be a quantification of all second level domains,
registered domains, by end users, by organizations, and this will
be a total number, so this is a complete quantification. And
spoiler alert, the number is over 5 million domains. And then we
will look into some parameters, algorithms, key length of part of
these domains, of 3.4 million domains. And I have to say that,
data sets that we’re talking about today are only slightly
updated from 2015. However, I have run an update in the last
week, to present you the most recent numbers on DNSSEC
algorithms so that we can see how many elliptic curves, signing
[inaudible] are being used.
All right. So first, let’s talk about the top level domains. So next
slide please. The measurement that we’re using here is, we’re
downloading the root zone file from IANA daily, and we’re
probing the top level domain service daily for DNS key record
and for some other records.

And [inaudible] you’re seeing

observation over two years, from 2013 to 2015. All right, so
you’ve seen figures similar to this.
As you can see, the total number of DNSSEC domains has
increased, as has the total number of domains at all, due to the

Page 13 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

new gTLD deployment. And as you can see, there is still a gap
between signed domains and total domains, but this gap has
been getting smaller and smaller.
All right, so let’s take a look at what algorithms are being used
by top level domains, and all top level domains are using RSA as
signing algorithm. All of them are using separate key signing
keys, and zone signing keys, which is no surprise. And if we take
a look at the key length that are being used, the most frequently
used RSA length, but length, for the key signing key is 2,000 bit,
2,048 bit. And the most frequently used size for the zone signing
key is 1024. And there is a small cluster, well not quite small, it’s
a large cluster of zone signing keys with 1280 bit, which most of
them can be attributed to [inaudible] registry services, which is
an infrastructure provider for new [general?] top level domains.
Okay. So, now that we know 1024 bit is the most commonly
used zone signing key size, now the interesting question is how
often are they replaced? This is enough, and how often are the
keys rolled over. I would like to present this data in two different
groups. So here on the life side, you see those top level domains
that have been signed for the whole time.
So these are the well-established domains that have existed for
a long period of time, that have been signed for the whole two
years. And we can assume that they have a stable operation,

Page 14 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

reliable operation, they know what they are doing, and they are
not changing their parameters daily, probably. And as you can
see here, on the X-axis, the X-axis says the interval of key rollover
procedures. It’s in days.
And the blue line here says that about one-third of those top
level domains, of 94 top-level domains that have been signed for
the whole two years, are switching keys every 30 days, and most
are switching keys after 90 or 100 days, so let’s say three to four
months. And almost all of them are actually replacing the zone
signing key at one period, at one point in time.
There is a very small gap. You can see the blue line ends here. It
does not go to the upper end. So a few top level domains
haven’t changed the zone signing key at all. These are the
exception. However, if you look at the red line, you can see the
key signing keys replaced by some top level domains once a
year. By some top level domains, it has been replaced in an
interval of two years, and this is what we can say from our
observation of looking at the two-year period. And about half of
the top level domains did not replace the key signing key at all,
which could mean that they haven’t done it yet at all, or it could
mean that we haven’t seen it in our two-year observation
period.

Page 15 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

If we go to the right figure, here we see those top level domains
which have been signed for only part of the two years, because
they started signing within these two years, or they existed for
only a partial, well, only part of the two-year observation period,
because most of them are the new generic top level domains.
So what you can see here is, those that are replacing the zone
signing key, are doing it after 30 days, after 90 days, of the 120
days. So this is the usual replacement period, and about half of
them did not replace a zone signing key at all. And if we take a
look at the red line, the key signing key, about 90% have not
replaced the key signing key at all. However, this could simply
mean that the DNSSEC operation hasn’t matured yet, that it
hasn’t existed for a long enough time.
So if the observation continues here, and if I present an update
on the analysis, the figure might look a bit better. So yeah, we
will have to look at this in the future. All right, let’s take a look at
the RSA public exponent, it’s one of the vital parameters that
you can choose, a part from the key length for the signing
procedure.

And the choice of the public exponent, the E-

parameter, determines mainly the verification performance.
The usual guideline is use a small value, and use a value with a
low [inaudible], so use the value which has a low number of
once in the binary representation.

Page 16 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And as you can see here, the most frequently used public
exponent of this, two to the power of 16 plus one, there are
some other numbers, Verisign uses, for example, the value of
three, and there is also two to the power of 32 plus one, but all of
these choices are fine. They are safe, they are fast, there is
nothing wrong with them. So there is no big surprise in here.
Okay, so now let’s take a look at the second level domains. First
of all, let’s count how many second level domains we have that
are assigned. And the method that we’re using here is zone
enumeration, NSEC zone enumeration, which is quite easy, and
NSEC 3 zone enumeration, which is a bit more difficult, but also
possible. And we will be querying top level domain service, or
top level domains. And we will include a few second level
domains, which are well, let’s say, part of a top level domain
registry.
Like for example, [inaudible] or CO UK, we will apply zone
enumeration on these as well and aggregate them under the
respective top level domain. Okay, so the zone enumeration
takes about three or four days. Can be run in parallel on all of
those top level domains, and after it has completed, it yields 8
million NSEC records from 100 top level domains that are using
the regular NSEC denial of existence, and yields 7.5 million NSEC
three records with hash values from the NSEC three, of 540 top

Page 17 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

level domains, which are using NSEC three hashed denial of
existence.
As you can see here, the NSEC three record count is lower than
the NSEC count, although more top level domains are using
NSEC three, which is simply because they’re using the NSEC
three out feature, which means less records are created, thus we
have few NSEC three records and NSEC records. NSEC three
zone enumeration requires a bit of computation power in order
to, well, compute on the client’s side which query you would
want to execute next, and then to send it to the server. And it
requires computation time, however, as CPU, let’s say a quad
core CPU machine, sufficient to retrieve most NSEC three hash
values.
So you would get about 99, more than 99% of NSEC three
records, with one machine, with a CPU, but if you want a
complete NSEC three chain for those top level domains which
have large zones, which have let’s say more than 100,000
domain names, then a CPU will take a very long time. So this is a
point where we switch to a GPU or graphic cards, which offers
more computation power, to close the few gaps so to get
complete NSEC three chain.
All right, so here is the statistics about the NSEC and NSEC three
records that we have counted, and the record includes a type

Page 18 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

information, so we know how many secure delegations, or how
many DS records do we have. And as you can see here, the
Dutch top level domain, dot NL, has most DS records, 2.2 million,
and then we have number two, the Brazilian, and the Czech top
level domain name.
We have dot COM and dot SE. And what is interesting here is
that out of those top five with DS records, with secure
delegations, four of them, those country codes top level
domains, have provided some kind of incentive in order to
activate DNSSEC, so that the registrars who will be using
DNSSEC, and it looks that these initiatives have been successful,
and they actually led to, well, quite high, or quite large,
deployment numbers.
I don’t know whether dot COM has provided some kind of
incentive, but it’s safe to assume those, these incentives
provided by country code top level domains, have fueled the
deployment at the dot COM top level domain as well. So on the
next slide, here with an explanation of the, what we actually see
here in the numbers.

We have a total number of securely

delegated registered domains, so people have registered those
domains and have activated DNSSEC, and the total numbers
here, 5.1 million.

Page 19 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And then we have a few, not only a few, but one million, almost
one million, address records, so we can see that there are A
records, quad A records, and a few C name and [inaudible]
records in top level domain zones, which is not what you usually
would expect, but yeah, it exists as well.
We have some NSEC three records with an empty type field, I will
explain it on the next slide, and we have, well, other records
which are not of interest to you. Okay, so why do we have these
many address records and NSEC three records with an empty
type field?

Some top level domains allow to put address

records, that’s part of the operation. For example, the dot DE
top level domain allows us to put delegations, secure delegation
into the zone, but under certain conditions, you’re also allowed
to put address records directly into the TLD zone.
So this is why you can, for example, put WWW dot example DE
into the zone, and if you put WWW dot example DE into the TLD
zone, then NSEC three would [inaudible] that there will be also a
NSEC three record for example DE, which will have an empty
type field, which will be for an empty [inaudible]. This is how
NSEC three works, denied of existence requires that each empty
non-terminal will have its own NSEC three record.
So this is why we have address records and empty records. And
if we go to the next slide, we can see here dot ORG has also a few

Page 20 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

address records and NSEC three records with an empty type
information, and I’m not aware that dot ORG allows to put
address records directly into the zone, however, dot ORG seems
to, it seems that it does not force the removal of [blue?] records
after a delegation has been removed.
So if you have a delegation, and if you put [blue] records into the
TLD zone, then the [blue] records is not authoritative, it will not
be signed. However, if the delegation is removed, then the
formal [blue] record will become authoritative, and it will be
signed. So this is why there can be records like NS1 dot example
dot ORG, which will be an authoritative record after the
delegation has been removed, when there is no longer a
delegation.
And if there is an address record, as one example of dot ORG,
then it will be also a record with an empty type field, so there
will also be record for example dot ORG, which is again, because
NSEC three denial of existence requires these [inaudible]
records.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
I’m not sure about this. I will have to look at the complete
statistics. Oh, we had a question. Maybe you can…

Page 21 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DAN YORK:

Yeah, so just to let people know. If you are going to ask a
question, which is awesome, we encourage questions, please do
come to the microphone and speak, because we do have people
listening remotely.

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Okay, so let’s move on to the next slide. So now that we’ve
quantified second level domains, now that we know how many
second level domains are, let’s take a look at their parameters.
So the measurement method that we’re using here is, first we
need to know the clear text domain names. We have now
counted NSEC three records, but these include only hash values,
but now we need the clear text domain name, so that we can
send queries for DS records for DNS key records.
And in order to do that, we need to, well, reverse those hash
values to clear text name, so we need to employ hash breaking
techniques, and this requires a lot of computation power. And in
order to do this efficiently, we need to use GPUs. We can use
CPUs, but we will go get only very few results from it, so we’re
using GPUs in order to do this.
And the numbers that we’re getting is from the 7.5 million hash
values that we acquired. We can reverse 4.6 million hash values,
in about three weeks of GPU computing, with four graphic cards.
So four consumer graphic cards are sufficient to break 60% of

Page 22 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

the hash value with little effort. And I don’t want to go into the
detail, how this hash breaking techniques works, however, there
are different methods. [One possibility is to use] brute force
each and every mark of chain based attacks, but a dictionary
based attack is the most efficient one.
Okay, so after we have broken part of the domain names, and
that we also know the NSEC records, there are also clear text
names in it, we’re now sending queries for DS records for DNS
key records, and out of those 5.1 million DNSSEC signed domain
names, we get a response from 3.4 million domains. So this is,
these are the [inaudible] that we know. And we’re sending DNS
key queries, and we’re looking at the algorithms that have been
used. And what we can see here, first of all, zero domains are
using RSA with MD5 as hashing algorithm, which is good
because it’s deprecated and insecure. And what we can see is a
few domains use DSA, but the number is not very large.
But the most frequently used algorithm is one of the RSA
variance. More than 99% of domains are using RSA assigning
algorithm. And in 2015, this is again a slightly outdated number,
we have seen that a few appearances of elliptic curve signing
algorithms, either the Russian ghosts standard, or the
[inaudible] standard.

Page 23 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And on the next slide, we have update from last week. I’ve requeried those 3.4 million domain names, and I got a response
from 2.6 million, so not all domains are responding anymore,
which is while domains are appearing, they are being added and
removed. So the name space is always changing. So not all
domains exist at this point. This is, well, I would say, expected.
However, 2.6 million are still existing and have responded. And
what we can see is that DSA number are declining. RSA is still
the most frequently used algorithm, and easy DSA numbers are
growing. The number is not huge, but keep in mind, and this is
the number of domains that have switched from one of, well
either DSA or RSA to [easy] DSA, so this, these are not newly
signed domains.
This is a number that I cannot give to you today. Okay, so let’s
take a look at RSTA length being used at second level domains.
First of all, we can see that a few thousand domains are using
512 bit RSA keys, which is definitely [inaudible] doesn’t offer any
reasonable security over unsigned domains. 512 bit can be
broken on one machine, within three weeks, and if you invest
some computing power [inaudible] NC2, you can break it within
a few hours, if you invest some few hundred dollars.
So the most frequently used size for the key signing keys, like
with the top level domains, 2,000 bit. The most frequently used

Page 24 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

size for the zone signing key, like with the top level domains, is
1024 bit. And I haven’t included the 2016 numbers here, but the
numbers are slightly shifting to longer keys, but there is no
major change here. So the keys are getting slightly longer, but
1024 bit is still the most frequently used size for the zone signing
key.
Okay now let’s take a look at the RSA public exponent. Here we
see a bit more diversity at the top level domains. First of all, two
to the power of 16 plus one is as well, the most frequently used
RSA public exponent. But we see numbers that are close to the
power of 16 plus one, but not exactly. And this looks like there
have been some occurrences of a type, also people maybe
manually entered, or tried to enter, 65,537, but they made a
typo, and this is, well maybe, a strange or funny, but this
shouldn’t be really a problem.
The verification performance will be slightly lower, but probably
within a [inaudible] range, so nobody will notice. And there is no
security issue with this, as long as the RSA algorithm is
implemented correctly. If the RSA algorithms is implemented
correctly, and the basic RSA properties are met, and then you
can use different exponent.
problem.

Page 25 of 143

This shouldn’t be a security

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Okay, so we have seen few domain names, a few domains have
been using DSA, let’s take a look at the key lengths here. And the
maximum key length, which is specified for DSA in DNSSEC is
1024 bit, and this is also the most frequently used size for the
key signing key and the zone signing key.
So you cannot use a longer key because it is not specified.
However, please not that 1024 bit DSA key is, does not have the
same size in your DNSSEC response on the wire, like 1024 bit
RSA. This is because these algorithms work in a different way,
and a DSA requires additional parameters. So the 1024 bit is
[inaudible], but there are additional parameters.

So the

response will be about three times as large.
And as DNSSEC is quite sensitive to the message size, DSA may
not be the right choice here, compared to well, other algorithms.
Okay, let’s try to validate those domains. We have 3.4 million
domain names, and we are trying to validate the DNS key
records, and what we can say is that 99% validate successfully,
but we can also see that 0.6% fail to validate in 2015.
And in 2016, numbers got slightly worse. Now 1.3% are failing
validation, so which would be in absolute numbers, 20,000 and
30,000 domain names. And the most frequent error that we
have seen is that when we’re querying for a DNS key record set,

Page 26 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

we do get a response, but the response does not include any
DNS key record.
So there is a DS record, it indicates this domain name as signed,
this domain is signed. It should be signed, but we don’t get a
DNS key response or… That’s not true. We get a DNS key
response, but without a DNS key from the DNS service. So there
is a dangling DNS record, and the validation will fail.
Then another error that we’ve seen is that there is a DNS key in
some instances, but it’s not the right DNS key. So probably there
was a rollover and it hasn’t been updated, or some other
configuration error. And we have also seen that signatures have
expired, so this will also result in a validation error. And this
type of [fault?] has actually gotten better, so in 2016, there were
less expired signatures, so maybe automation of the signing has
worked on maybe, I don’t know, signing operations got better,
and whatever the reason is.
Okay, so here are a few recommendations. First of all, deprecate
DSA. It’s using large DNS key records, specified up to only 10, 24
bit, which is, which may be sufficient for now, but it won’t be
sufficient in the next year or so. It’s better switched to RSA or
ESDA, this would be a better choice in my opinion.
If you are using RSA, use keys with at least 2,000 bit key length,
and this is a general consensus that a 10, 24 bit has not been

Page 27 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

broken yet, so it’s considered safe for now, but it’s not, secure
for now, but it’s not considered secure for the next few years. So
if you’re continuing to use RSA in the next few years, you should
update too long a key. So let’s say 1500 bit or 2,000 bit.
These are recommendations which have been made by
[inaudible] or by BSI, or in academic literature. If you are stuck
with 10, 24 bit for operational reasons, replace the key every few
weeks, if you can. This is what most TLD operators are doing, or
what many TLD operators are doing. I don’t know whether
second level domain operators are doing this number, which I
do not have here.
Consider using ECDSA, 256 bit should be enough. This offers
security level comparable to RSA with 3,000 bit. So ECDSA has
short message sizes, and has good security level, so it’s a wise
choice for an algorithm. And consider if you can use a combined
signing key instead of a separate key signing, key zone signing
key.
If you are TLD operator, this is not an option for you. You are
probably using hardware security models, and you need to use
those separate keys, but if you’re signing on one machine, and
both of your KSK and your [inaudible] are on the same machine
anyway, you probably don’t have any advantage from doing
this. So in this case, you can use a combined signing key, which

Page 28 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

serves the same purpose as both the KSK and the [inaudible]
and you will save a bit on the message size.
So you can increase your RSA key length, for example. Okay, so
let’s conclude. We have seen there are more than 5 million
domains that are using DNSSEC. Around 1% of them have
shown validation errors. We’ve seen that RSAs are dominant
signing algorithm. A few domains have switched to ECDSA, but
what I do not know is how many newly signed domains are using
ECDSA, or another elliptic curve [inaudible].
This is… In order to do this, I would need to rerun the zone
enumeration, and this is a number which I can maybe provide to
you in a few weeks. Thank you so much.
[APPLAUSE]

DAN YORK:

Thank you, Matthäus. And I knew the question line was going to
start, because I remember the comments you had in there were
just like baked for the folks who are here. So go ahead, Robert,
shoot.

ROBERT:

Hi, I’m Robert from PCH. Have a question about one of your
earlier slides, says how often people, KSK rollover. It seems that

Page 29 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

many of the new gTLDs that came into the root zone,
immediately after getting into the root zone, they would actually
roll the key. And it would be interesting to see if anyone, just
after the initial key rollover, if they actually did something,
because I think they probably came into the root with a test…

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

With a test key, yeah.

ROBERT:

…with a test key, and because ICANN wasn’t really clear into
how to get into the root. And suddenly they would email these
gTLD registrants saying, “Hey, you live to go… You’re set to go
live tomorrow.” And people were kind of panicking a little bit.
So I think many did the PDT test, pre-delegation tests, with
actually software keys, and then they got into the root, and then
they switched. That’s my guess.

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

That’s an interesting point. I would have to look into that.
Thank you.

SHANE [KIRK]:

Hi, Shane [Kirk]. Could you go back one slide maybe? To the
recommendations? Yeah.

Page 30 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
What’s that?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
[Inaudible]? Yeah, actually that was my question. Consider
using a combined key. So I probably didn’t really understand it,
because it seems like… I mean, the whole reason why we have
the KSK model, ZSK model, is to make administration easier. So
if you’re using a combined key, then don’t you have to update
your DS record every time you change your key?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

That is true. That can be a disadvantage, you’re right on this
point. However, if you can automate the DS update, then this
shouldn’t be a problem for you. And there are algorithms or
methods to simplify this update.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Okay. I know there is some work going on at the IETF right now
to try and automate that, and guess if you are happy with your
registrar and are comfortable doing some scripting, then it can
be made to work.

MATTHÄUS WANDER:
Page 31 of 143

Okay, so let’s say it’s maybe not the best choice for everyone.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Okay, fair enough, yeah.

DUANE WESSELS:

Hi.

Duane Wessels from Verisign.

You talked about zone

enumeration. Did you enumerate all of the zones? Or did you
get the zone files from some places?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

We enumerated all top level domains.

DUANE WESSELS:

Okay. Is there a reason you didn’t get the zone files from the
ones where they were available?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Well, zone enumeration works fine. So… [LAUGHTER]

DUANE WESSELS:

Okay. Well, the reason I asked is because, like for dot COM and
dot NET, I get different numbers than you showed.

Page 32 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Maybe this is because numbers are from 2015. I’m not sure
about this, but it should be a good idea to compare these
numbers, if you write me an email.

DUANE WESSELS:

Okay. Can I ask one more? Did you…? Do you see any evidence
of like more than one algorithm used by TLDs or second level
domains?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Not by TLDs, by second level domains, I haven’t looked into this
specifically. But I guess this could probably be happening. I
should look into this. Thank you.

DAN YORK:

Opportunity for future research, there you go. Andre.

ANDRE:

Andre [inaudible]… Why 2K RSA keys? Why did you pick the
[inaudible] bits?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Page 33 of 143

Why to use 2K RSA keys?

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DAN YORK:

In your recommendations.

ANDRE:

In your recommendations. Why not something in between?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Well, there is a recommendation [inaudible] which uses 2,048 bit
[CROSSTALK]…

ANDRE:

…for long-term signatures.

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

That is true. All right. That’s true. So if you’re replacing your key
very often, you can use a lower number, will be still secure.
However, this recommendation here, this is not specifically for
TLD operators, which are changing the key regularly before, let’s
say, the general audience. And second level domain operators
might not want to roll the key every few weeks.

ANDRE:

Yeah. Well, it’s my recommendation, don’t use 2K keys because
they are too big, just switch to ECDSA.

Page 34 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

Yeah, that’s a good recommendation.

DAN YORK:

All right, we like that. I’m going to cap the question queue,
because we’re running out of time there. But go ahead Edward.

EDWARD:

Edward…

DAN YORK:

[Inaudible] ask another one if you want to.

EDWARD:

Edward [inaudible] from dot NA. Since I know you didn’t ask me
for permission to do this, how many laws have you broken?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

I got a similar question two or three years ago when I introduced
NSEC three zone enumeration tool. And I know that some
people are not happy about this, and I actually was [inaudible]
when I started this research, and I emailed one of the SIDN labs
employees. And he said, “Well, continue doing if you know that
you’re not doing any harm. And if you feel that something might
go wrong, ask us first.”

Page 35 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And I don’t know how many laws I have broken, but I haven’t
caused any disruptions. So this is what makes me happy about
this.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
I don’t think there is a law about root zone enumeration, there
probably is a civil case.

DAN YORK:

Not yet anyway.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

All right.

MARK:

Mark, from Microsoft. I have a comment and a question. The
first comment is, the first speaker mentioned that they were not
looking at IDNs in the ccTLDs or otherwise, please look at IDNs.

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

IDNs have been included here.

I’ve included all top level

domains. However, the IDN numbers are lower, so they’re at the
bottom of the list.

Page 36 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

MARK:

Yeah. I am very interested in universal acceptance, so IDNs is of
particular interest to me. Also, the question, I don’t know if you
have… If this is…? Is this the first time you’ve done this or the
second? I was very surprised to see how much [inaudible] was
still being used, and I was wondering if there were a trend
towards deprecating that? And I was wondering if you could
make that part of your recommendations to use [inaudible]?

MATTHÄUS WANDER:

This was the first time that I’ve made this study to this extent. It
is a complete quantification. However, I can compare the 2015,
2016 numbers. I think, we haven’t seen a shift from [inaudible]
156, but yeah, this could be one of the recommendations. Yes.
Thank you.

DAN YORK:

Thank you, Matthäus for this research.

Thank you.

Give

Matthäus a round of applause.
[APPLAUSE]
Mark, just to clarify to you. We actually track all of the IDNs in
our database, but in the maps, right now, they just go on ccTLDs.
So they only change color based on that. So to give us another

Page 37 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

perspective on some of these measurements, and for those who
are new to DNSSEC workshop, part of what we like to do is look
at some of these measurements, and we have different
mechanisms and methods for that, and so Geoff.

GEOFF HUSTON:

Thanks Dan, and good morning all. My name is Geoff Huston, I
work with APNIC.

And I’m going to give you a very quick

rundown of the other side of the coin. There are folk who sign
their domain names with DNSSEC, and you’ve seen how many
and what algorithms they use, but of course, folk need to use it
to validate. And so what I’m trying to look at is, how many
people will validate a signed name?
So this is a quick review of where we are with that. Next. So, I’m
actually doing a particular experiment, and I used Google Ads to
do this.

Why?

Because for this kind of broad based

measurement, the ad network is amazingly good. They actually
try and give me fresh eyeballs every single time, as long as you
don’t click on it, it’s really, really cheap.
For a little over $100 a day, we get around 10 million
experiments a day, because inside the ad, you can put HTML 5.
You can put in active scripting. So you don’t need to click. As
soon as the ad gets impressed in your browser, be it on a mobile
or on a laptop, or whatever, the HTML 5 will run. And what it

Page 38 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

does is it gives you three very simple tests. Get these three URLs.
The URLs are unique, absolutely unique.

They include

timestamp, they include a bunch of stuff inside the domain
name part of this. So in [inaudible] won’t help you. Doesn’t
help. This is designed to defeat all [inaudible].
One of the names is correctly signed. So it has got full DNSSEC,
the lot. And I’ve actually done a little bit of a trick, so that it
looks like there is an infinite number of signed, delegated
domains to make all of this work.

So I’m using a sort of

[inaudible] resolver, thank you Ray [Bellus?], that actually
generates signed sub-domains on the fly.
The second one is badly signed. So that if you go there, you’re
not really following validation, are you? Because you’re never
meant to go there, it’s badly signed. And the third one is not
signed at all, which is the control. In this particular experiment,
I’m using [inaudible] one. I have reported, and I reported at the
last meeting on ECDSA, and I’ll share the results again now, it
hasn’t changed much.
And what I’m looking at is, how many users will do this?
Because actually there is a difference between resolvers and
users. The ad goes to the user’s browser, I’m counting users by
browser.

Looking at resolvers is much more complicated,

because of resolver farms, passing around queries, resolvers are

Page 39 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

difficult. So I’m not measuring resolvers, and I’m not measuring
signed domains, that’s a different problem. Next.
So this is, you know, a standard map of the world. The light of
the color, the more [inaudible] elevation I see with the users in
that country. This is a percent, basically, of users in that country
that receive the ad. So Iceland, Sweden, and Norway, you know,
a little pocket of green. Next. And that’s where we see the most
validation by user communities. There is an impact of Google’s
public DNS. And Google’s public DNS has been actively pushed
in areas of what looks to be sub-Saharan Africa and across
Southwest Asia, is where you see most of it. So those high
numbers there are largely as a result of ISPs actually using
Google.
I have no idea about Papua New Guinea. Absolutely none. Little
pocket of green down there. Next. So this is the picture you saw
before. Those dips down that you’re worried about, when I say I
do delegated sub-domains that are signed on the fly, I do most
of the time. But sometimes, the delegated signing code sort of
gets stuck on a date and the date expires, and it takes a day or
two to go, oops, and fix the thing. So, as you see, it’s sort of a 30
day interval, and sometimes we jump a bit late. That’s why it
dips a bit.

Page 40 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So next. What you actually see is, oddly enough, a momentum
of DNSSEC adoption has largely topped off. That globally, you
know, between 14 and 15% now, and that hasn’t really changed
an awful lot since the start of 2015. Next. So what’s going on?
Now, there are some folk who have had this switched on forever,
and almost every single ISP in Sweden has it turned on.
So no matter where you look in Sweden, they’re doing DNSSEC
validation for their users. If you are in Comcast and you let
Comcast do your DNS for you, it’s validating. And there are an
awful lot of Comcast users on this planet, you know. If you are in
Estonia, that way? [LAUGHTER]
Two-thirds of you right down there, are doing validation, and
have been for an awful lot of time. And Romania, which recently
signed dot RO, actually turned on validation back at the early
part of 2015. So these are a kind of incumbents. There are more
than this, but that’s kind of the folk who have been doing it for
some time. Next.
And these are the folk who just turned it on. If you notice, Brazil
changed color, and the reason why, is that one provider, [ClairO], turned it on. Now [Clair-O] is big. So then when [Clair-O]
turned it on, you actually saw a large amount of users in Brazil
actually then started doing DNSSEC validation. Iceland is green

Page 41 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

largely because Ice Net turned it on start of the year. And you
can see the results. Obvious, you know, that it’s working.
And interestingly, the Farrell Islands, which is almost the clean
sweep of the Scandinavian countries, the Farrell Islands, again,
turned it on earlier this year, and 90% of the sheep and the
people on the Farrell Islands all do DNSSEC validation.
In Australia, we’re keenly interested in New Zealand, obviously,
the poor cousins to the east. And fascinatingly, the bastards
have ratted on us, and now about half of the users in New
Zealand are now doing DNSSEC validation, which is not the case
in Australia. So while the numbers are steady globally, there are
still folk who actually are turning it on.
And you can see, as they turn it on, some cases, like [Clair-O],
they do bring a few million users with them. Other cases, like
the Farrell Islands or Iceland, it’s a smaller population. Next. So
what about here? That’s not my measurement. In Finland, you
actually turned it off in July last year, and turned it back on
again later in the year, and almost none of you use Google in
Finland, if there are any Finnish here.
Very few folk in Finland use Google. These are actually the
service providers actually doing DNSSEC validation. Currently
sitting at around, if I can see that right, 30, 40%. No, 20, 30%.
Next. So we know who you are. So if you’re using [inaudible],

Page 42 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

you’re validating.

If you’re using [inaudible] Networks,

[inaudible], what does [inaudible] mean? Something.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Yeah, right, okay, thank you. Thank you Finns. If you’re using
[Nebulas], you will probably be using a validating resolver. If
you’re using DNA, like my phone, wherever my phone has got to,
no. Or [inaudible]. If you look over on the right, that’s the
sample count. And within a country, Google tends to smear the
ads relatively evenly. So my guess is, in this country, there are
three biggies, DNA, [Alyssa], and [inaudible], and then a fourth, a
[U-Net], which is kind of there, about half of the size of the
others.
And the rest are kind of small. So one of those big four is
validating, the others aren’t. Someone should do something.
Yes? Okay, good. Next. The bigger picture around here. Google
has done most of its work with public DNS in Africa, so this, the
numbers in Africa, and in parts of Asia, largely reflect that
concentration where Google has evidently concentrated their
efforts.
Anyone else using [all eights?] is basically doing so almost, I
think, accidently. Yes, they can, but there is no great focus. In
North America, the momentum is stronger behind Comcast
decision. Interestingly, the other big providers haven’t taken it

Page 43 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

up, which is surprising but, you know, sometimes folk look at
their competitors and emulate it, sometimes they proudly just
ignore it. Don’t know why.
Where I’ve seen trends that I haven’t actually noted, as well as
Iceland and New Zealand, bastards, Norway has actually moved,
and Nepal has been recent ones that have taken this up as well.
Next. The first thing I should mention though is just a brief
sideline, it’s not in the slides about ECDSA. As we try and
increase the key links, we run into larger responses.
As we run into larger responses, we’re going to run into a
problem with UDP and v6. Once the response rate gets above
1280, and you’re using a MPU of 1280 in your server, you’re going
to run into an enormous problem, because once you start using
extended headers for fragmented packets, you can confidently
expect a drop rate of 30%. Not of the frag, of the leading part of
the packet. So big packets in the DNS, particularly with v6 which
is where you’re definitely heading, do not go well together.
And so ECDSA, you really should be looking at. And you really
should be looking at whether you’re doing an up to date resolver
library. So if you’re running a recursive resolver for your users,
check out whether you support ECDSA. If not, it’s likely you’re
running a really, really old software set, that’s bad for two
reasons.

Page 44 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Really, really old software has its bugs, and that’s really, really
bad. And secondly, you really should be running ECDSA and v6.
So, do something. Back to what I’ve said here. If you actually
are running an authoritative name server, what you actually see
is not 14% of folk validating. That’s not what you see.
What you typically will see is that almost everyone, 80% of all of
the queries you get, are going to have to have [inaudible] zero
and DNSSEC okay. So if you’ve got a name that’s signed, you
will be serving those credentials, for eight out of 10 of those
queries, which is amazing.
However, only one quarter will follow it up with a request for
either the DNS key, or the DS record. So any one quarter of
them, will actually start to perform validation. That’s still more
than 14%. That’s 25%. But, a whole bunch of you, including
ISPs as well as users, have set up a second resolver. And if you
don’t like serve fail, you go to the other one. And about half of
the folk who validate, go to a non-validating resolver as their
secondary resolver.
Why did we do NSEC three? To stop zone enumeration. Yeah,
that worked well. Why do we have secondary resolvers? So that
we don’t believe DNSSEC validation. Yeah, that worked equally
well. If you’re going to have a secondary to a validating resolver,
make that one validate too, right? Because half of you don’t.

Page 45 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So that leaves us with that 14 to 15% of folk, that when they get
back server fail, believe it, and even if they have a second
resolver, still believe it. Serve fail, in this context, a badly signed
name, is a badly signed name. So that’s kind of the area. There
is rich picking. If you are an authoritative name server, it looks
like the world is validating actually already. Everyone is picking
up credentials.
It’s just the resolvers aren’t following up, and maybe they
should. Next. So that’s where the reports are, world maps,
stats, all kinds of cute things. There is a whole bunch of v6 stuff
there as well, if you kind of look behind that URL a bit, and in
particular, some new reports that I’ve put up as to who is
dropping v6 on the floor, if you’re interested. So any questions?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

So we’ll turn things over to questions, and be sure to state your
name please. And I see that there is Dan York. Thank you.

DAN YORK:

Dan York. Thank you. So, Geoff, these are great. I love your
trend lines. It’s always good. One question I had for you, on
your mechanism, you know, there is an increasingly amount of
use of ad blocking software. I use it myself on all of my things on
that…

Page 46 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

GEOFF HUSTON:

Evil, evil, evil person.

DAN YORK:

Well, so my question is, are you seeing…? Do you have any way
of measuring that impact, or seeing…? Are you seeing a decline
in sample size? I mean, it’s a big debate within the publication
industry right now. The media industry around the use of ad
blocking. I’m just curious.

GEOFF HUSTON:

Well, right now, sort of we put up a budget, it’s called CPM, it’s
clicks per million or something, and we put up, I think, 150
budget, and it delivers approximately 11 million ads a day. We
exhaustively analyze what we’re doing, and how we’re doing it,
and how the ad machinery works. But what we don’t know, and
it’s really, really hard to know, is, what’s the live population out
there that isn’t getting ads?
It’s one of those huge unknowns in all of this industry that we
can sort of dimly guess at some of these numbers. What we do
know, and we do analyze, is the source address of the folk that
actually get the ad. So this is why we get this constant evidence
that Google’s pool of potential ad folk, is very, very big. It’s
certainly up in the low billions, you know, easily.

Page 47 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

We’re constantly at 11 million a day to seeing new addresses. To
what extent we see blocking? Really, really hard to tell because
if the ad gets blocked, the HTML 5 doesn’t run. If the HTML 5
doesn’t run, you don’t talk to me. If you don’t talk to me, you
don’t exist, Dan. All right? It’s as simple as that.

DAN YORK:

Yeah, no, it’s interesting. Anyway, thank you for the ongoing
reports. It will be interesting to see how this continues as ad
blocking, because I know there is one provider, a mobile
provider in the UK, who is now blocking all ads on their mobile
networks for all of their providers. They’re doing a new thing, so
you might not see anything coming back from three, I think, in
the UK.

GEOFF HUSTON:

I’m seeing Sky Net like crazy. The only one that’s sort of weird is
anomalous is SKA Telecom in South Korea, extensively has a
much higher market share than I’m seeing in ads.

DAN YORK:

Yeah, anyway, good. Thank you for the continued work.

GEOFF HUSTON:

Thank you.

Page 48 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you very much.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
More questions, please.

MARK:

Mark [inaudible] at IS. I have a question about fragmentation.
Do you suggest that the size should be limited to 1280 to prevent
fragmentation of UDP?

DAN YORK:

If you’re running UDP and v6, I would strongly urge you to set
your NTU at 1500. If you’re running TCP and v6, I would set your
TCP MSS down to 1220, because the whole issue around the
fragmentation handling of v6 is so shocking, you need to avoid
it. If you run your UDP at 1280, and you’ve got responses of 14,
14 octets, I think Verisign are going to tell us in a few minutes, if
you’ve got high response sizes, you know, drive straight into that
problem with UDP.
And the problem is, because both leading and trailing frags get
dropped, as if the server wasn’t there. So you’re getting at this
whole query retransmit, time out disaster. So if you are running
v6 on your recursive resolvers, look at how you can up your MTU

Page 49 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

to 1500, but drop, kick your MSS for TCP low, because if you’re
running a high MSS for TCP, you’ve got the other problem of
ICMP6 path too big.
Whoever said v6 was easy? Yeah, right.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Thanks Martin. No, it’s a little bit more complicated than we
thought, and one size does not fit all is what we are learning.
30% packet drop rate is just horrendous, but that’s what we’re
seeing out there with v6 large UDP packets.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

[Inaudible] and [inaudible] actually [inaudible] on DNS, UDP,
IPv6, and if you behave nice, that’s what unbound bind are
doing in default, you actually, as an application, you’ll create the
fragments at 1280. That’s the recommended way of doing it.
But it turns out that if you’re not nice, and don’t do the [obvious]
thing and fragment, you have to get a much better [inaudible]
using UDP v6.
But apparently a lot of networks do accept [inaudible] and 12 80
packets.

So we are actually thinking about changing the

software and being not nice.

Page 50 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

GEOFF HUSTON:

The underlying drop rate in v6, that I did the same experiment
using ads and using large responses. The underlying drop rate
between 1280 and 1500 and v6 is 3%. If you turn your MTU down
to 1280, your drop rate immediately climbs up to 30%, oops.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yes. And that’s, I mean, as I said, since IPv6 [inaudible] in the
application, not in the network, you know, unbound and bind
are actually doing this nice, and so…

GEOFF HUSTON:

I think the default configs are wrong for UDP, is what I’m saying.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yeah, yeah, that’s right.

GEOFF HUSTON:

That’s what you’re saying too, right?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

That’s what I’m saying. We were really thinking about making
the default not nice.

GEOFF HUSTON:

Page 51 of 143

Yeah.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

SHANE [CURR]:

Shane [Curr], Beijing Internet Institute. So, I have a question. I
agree

with

your

recommendations

about

UDP

for

fragmentation. It makes abundant sense. And hopefully you
can convince all of the Australians that this is true. So, but I’m
not sure I agree about the recommendation for lowering the TCP
segment size.
My thinking is that, DNS is weird, but if we’re using TCP, we’re
using the same thing the web browsers use, so surely if the web
works at all in IPv6, we shouldn’t have all of these ICMP blockage
problems and things like that, right?

GEOFF HUSTON:

Wrong.

SHANE [CURR]:

So why does this not affect people on the [inaudible], and why
does this not cause huge consternation of problems for the
Googles, and the Facebooks, and the [CROSSTALK]…

GEOFF HUSTON:

…eyeballs is your friend is the base answer to this, Shane, that
all of, most of the world is actually ill-stacked equipped, and
most of the world actually sets off the two horses down the

Page 52 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

same race, and they’re waiting for the first [inaudible] exchange
to actually work. And so, in general, v4 saves your bacon when
v6 dies, seems to be going on.
But in the DNS world, that’s time, and it’s time you don’t want to
spend resolving an ephemeral question. The fast you can get rid
of the user, the better everyone else is. So for TCP, you will avoid
that problem by starting with a MSS that’s at 1220, you just
avoid the problem.
And your payload is such, because you’re going to stream,
hopefully the guy is giving you a window, that allow you to
stream multiple response here. The parts of the response that
are big anyway. You’re not losing time, what you are doing is
avoiding the RTTs to measure, to repair the problem.

SHANE [CURR]:

Sure. On the other hand, that makes a certain amount of sense,
although if there is any problems with the v6, which you know,
v6 networks tend to be crap, then have the eyeballs, all the logic
there makes sense, in which case…

GEOFF HUSTON:

Page 53 of 143

Go to Italy, v6 is astonishingly fast compared to v4.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

SHANE [CURR]:

Okay. Well, interesting, thank you.

JULIE HEDLUND:

And with that, I think we do have to cut off the questions, but
please join me in thanking Geoff for a very informative
presentation.
[APPLAUSE]
And now I’d like to ask the moderator, Russ, and the panelists to
come up for our panel discussion on DNSSEC deployment
challenges.

RUSS MUNDY:

Thank you Julie. I think we’ve made our way up here, and we’re
going to just move right into it. Most of the people know me, I’m
Russ Mundy. If you don’t, well I guess this may be your first
workshop. And if it is, I’m very glad about that. We’re always
happy to have newcomers here. So today’s panel, and this is
one of my favorite ones that we do something of this nature at
almost every one of these workshops, and that’s what are our
challenges in DNSSEC?
And so we have a great cross-section of people here today. And I
want to just go ahead and go down the list alphabetically. I
think that’s how we have the folks on here. So why don’t we go

Page 54 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

ahead and just start with Dani. Just jump right into it. Dan’s
going to run the clock, and I think we had 10 minutes a piece,
was it? Eight. Eight minutes a piece, okay.
Because we do want to keep time for questions. Go ahead Dani.

DANI GRANT:

Hi everyone.

I’m Dani.

I work at CloudFlare on DNS and

registrar. Next slide. CloudFlare signs 56 billion DNS record sets
live on the fly every day. And at this pace, we care a lot about
computing costs. And one of the key ways we save compute is
by lying in negative answers in DNSSEC.

So I’ll give brief

background and then I’ll show you exactly how we lie. Next
slide.
So this is everything that goes into a negative answer. Next
slide, next slide. SOA, next slide. The signature, next slide,
NSEC, next slide, for previous and next name, next slide, the
signature, next slide, next slide. Keep going. For the wild care,
so the signature, okay. So next slide.
So that’s six records, next slide. For IETF dot ORG, that’s over
1,000 bytes. Next slide. And of course, there is a problem where
you can continuously ask for the next name, next slide, and
discover every name in the zone. Next slide.

Page 55 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So this is actually in the spec. This was considered a feature.
Next slide, but it’s a bad idea. Imagine you can get every name
in the dot GOV zone, and you would discover every US
government agency, including the secret ones. Next slide. But
of course, there is NSEC three to the rescue. Next slide.
But NSEC three is a close but no cigar solution to the problem.
Next slide.

It actually gives you bigger answers, and now

requires a third NSEC three and signature in the answer, and
while it makes zone walking harder, it’s still not impossible, as
we saw, in Matthäus’s talk. Next slide.
So to recap. There are two problems with negative answers.
The first is that it requires the authoritative server to return the
previous and next name.

This is an extra lookup in every

negative answer, and it enables zone walking. And the second
are these giant answers just to negate the non-existence of
something. Next slide.
Okay, so let’s look at the first. The problem with previous and
next name. So they’re expensive, there is an extra lookup, and it
leaks information about the zone. Next slide. So, something
interesting about CloudFlare is, we actually do not have a zone
file at all, which makes this lookup even more expensive for us.
We have a database with all of the DNS records, and so if we
want to get the previous and next name, we have to go to the

Page 56 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

database and ask it to do a sorted search. Next slide. So there is
a solution to this previous and next name problem, it’s RFC 4470,
and it’s called white lies. And white lies says, you can just make
up the previous and next name.
And this helps. This is great. It solves the extra lookup, and it
solves the zone walking problem, but it still requires two NSEC
records to say one thing. Next slide. So we decided to take line
to the fullest extent. Instead of white lies, we do black lies. Next
slide. This is an example of CloudFlare’s black lies. You’ll notice
two things.
The first is that the NSEC is returned directly on the missing
name. so this means that we can return one NSEC record
instead of two. Next slide. The second thing you’ll notice is that
we always return this generated value as the next name, and this
saves us a database look up. Next slide.
This means we can just return one NSEC, these four records,
next slide, and our answers are pretty small. Next slide. So we
just don’t rely on an ex-domain, we land on data too. Next slide.
So no data, just background, returns one NSEC with all of the
types that exist on the name. Next slide.
We think this is super inefficient. To do this, we would have to
go and look up at all of the types that do exist, just to tell you
that the one type you ask for does not exist. Next slide. But

Page 57 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

remember, we like to lie, so what do we do? We set all of the
types, just not the type that you asked for. So next slide. So we
call this the DNS shotgun, when you ask for TXT, we say, “Yes, all
the types exist, just not TXT.” And then if you ask later for MX,
we’ll say, “All the types exist, even you know, TXT, just not MX.”
You might be wondering how this might be standards compliant.
You might be. There are three things. White lies already allows
us to randomly generate the next name in NSEC. The second
thing is that while because we set NSEC directly on the missing
name, we do not need a second NSEC in the record, in the
answer, and zone files are constantly changing.
And so setting many types in no data responses is feasible as
well. We’ve also submitted our black lies as an internet draft,
and so hopefully they’ll just become the standard.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

RUSS MUNDY:

Well Dani? That was impressive. Thank you. [APPLAUSE AND
LAUGHTER]
I think I’d like to have us continue on, and then we’ll keep the
questions at the end. So if you have any questions as we go
through, take a little note, write them down, and we’ll jump into
them afterwards. But I will take the moderator’s prerogative

Page 58 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

and say, have you been visited by the protocol police?
[Laughter]
Guess not. Okay. I believe Ari-Matti, is that right? Okay. Good,
please, go right ahead.

ARI-MATTI HUSA:

All right. I have a different view on this. I represent FICORA,
which is the registry in Finland. We do the FR domains, please
next. Administer the domains. There are about 400,000 now, a
little bit less. IDN, DNSSEC, and IPv6, of course. And the law is
changing in September so there might be a little bit of those
domains registered then.
And also a side note, that [inaudible] Island, dot AX, is not
managed by us. They have their own registry. Next please.
That’s the infrastructure we are using. We have the domain
database system in-house, and then we have the primary data
[inaudible] and a bunch of secondary all over the world.
The website domain, dot FI, which is going to be [inaudible] for
some reason that I don’t really understand, is the place to
register domains and manage them for the customers also. And
at the moment, anybody can, any Finnish person or company
can register their own domain directly from us.

Page 59 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

We provide the website and web service interface also for
registrars until September 2nd, and then the WHOIS is open data
service. And from September the 5th, when the law changes, we
have the EPP interface for registrars. Next please.
Okay, that’s, well the same thing really, we’re switching to
registrar-registrar model for all domains in September.

No

longer open only for Finnish registrars, so you can register your
domain name with dot FI if you wish, even from New Zealand.
[LAUGHTER]
Also, at the moment, we require when you register a domain,
you have to fully functioning DNS server, that’s not going to be
the case after September 5th. Okay, the plan was to, of course,
reduce the number of contacts and end customers for us, but so
far, it hasn’t been a great success. So far we have about 2,000
registrars already, already registered. All the nerds, they must,
you know, control their own domain, of course. Next please.
Okay, how about DNSSEC?

The topic was, what are the

challenges of the DNSSEC in Finland? I think the challenge is
nobody is using it. Really. The root zone was signed in 2010,
and support for sub-domains from late 2010, and so far, this
number is from two or three weeks ago. We have 329 signed FI
domain zone. That’s 0.1% of the whole number.

Page 60 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

In our neighbors, it’s a bit better. Sweden has about half of their
domains signed. So it has not been a marketing success, what
can I say? And I don’t know if it’s too complicated, or just a
failure to justify all of the trouble with rolling keys, and so forth,
and having all of the trouble, for what?
And I think our question really is, how to motivate domain
holders to use DNSSEC? Next please. That’s the specification.
We have all of this, of course, on our website, so nothing really
fancy about this. Next please. And also this is the same thing
really again, and they can add DS records for the [inaudible]
zoned by themselves, from the web.
And after September, that will be managed by the registrars.
Okay, next. Okay, the detail that we’re using, [HSM?] module for
signing, and the root server and signing functions are operated
by CSCIT, Center for Science Limited, that’s our contractor.
Next.
Okay, now, I get caught on this two weeks ago. I stated that the
biggest providers do offer the NSEC validation [inaudible], and
as we just saw, only one of them, one of the three, does it. I
actually tested this at home, and later when I thought about it,
well, I was using my own resolver. Okay.
[LAUGHTER]

Page 61 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Yeah. But, the ISPs, it was really hard to find any information or
statements from the web about DNSSEC and when they are
going to support it, and when their resolvers are already
supporting it or not. Next. That’s it.

RUSS MUNDY:

Thank you very much.
[APPLAUSE]
So I think we’re doing really great staying on time here. So we
should have good time for questions at the end. I think… See if
I got it close, Mauricio? From Costa Rica. Did I skip Geoff? Oh I
did skip Geoff. I went too far down my, yes. Geoff, you’re up,
thank you.

GEOFF HUSTON:

Thanks Russ. Next slide. You know, when you sort of talk about
deployment challenges, and I’m looking at this from this side of
the validating resolver, there is no doubt that no one could ever
say it’s complicated. You know, if you’re running by and then it
seems at least 70 to 80% of the world run bind, inside your name
the config file, you just simply say, DNSSEC validation, yes.
Now, if anyone thinks that’s hard, take up fishing or something
because it can’t get any easier than that. Next. So, sort of why

Page 62 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

don’t folk turn it on, and you know, it is a fascinating question.
It’s all too hard, well that doesn’t really work. It will take more
time to resolve a name is potentially an issue, but quite frankly,
that’s what caching is all about. And if you didn’t have caching,
you wouldn’t have a real time DNS, right?
So the most popular names, including the DNS key and DS
records, all of that validation chain, will get cached. So when
you actually look at the cost, the incremental cost to the user,
when your recursive resolver actually does DNSSEC validation,
most of the time it is remarkably hard to actually find what that
cost is over and above not validating. It’s basically extremely
small.
Or block out names was invalid DNSSEC signatures. Now if you
happen to work on the, if you will, the firewall side of a national
name firewall, this is a really very bad thing, because once you
started futzing with the DNS, if the domain name is signed, and
you are synthesizing bad answers, as happens in a number of
countries, then all of a sudden, that’s not going to work
anymore.
And if you’re trying to do some stupid, clever trick of trying to
synthesize v6 or v4 when you haven’t got it, such as DNSSEC six,
or DNSSEC six four dot Google dot com, that won’t work. But is
that necessarily a bad thing? Because what you’re really after is,

Page 63 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

if I want the DNS to be true to me, then the truth is what counts,
not stupid synthetic tricks. So, I actually think that’s not really
an argument.
Next one I’ve heard, two few names assigned to make a
difference. Well, maybe. But again, the issue is, if you don’t
validate, no one is going to sign. Once you start validating, the
values of signing are going to become obvious. Attacks in the
DNS are too rare to raise concerns. Structurally, a number of
countries put attacks in the DNS on 24 hours a day, seven days a
week.
Attacks in the DNS occur all of the time. Some by state actors,
others by other forms of actors. But realistically, the DNS is one
of those attack intensive areas, where the easiest way to
implement some censorship policy, or anything else is, go whack
it in the DNS. And so the DNS becomes this toy, this play thing,
of institutionalized lying.
So, too many folk are now relying on lies in the DNS, and that’s
probably a bad thing to do, because the DNS is changing under
your eyes. Go and look at DNS dot Google dot com as a small
example of what is happening, as a result of all of all of this. We
are now turning the DNS black. We’re putting the DNS inside
encrypted tunnels, whether it’s on port, what is it? 433 or what
is it? 5380 or something?

Page 64 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Sorry?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Port 853, and putting the DNS inside a TLS area. The more you
play in the DNS, the more we’re going to hide the DNS from you.
And so, the issue is, don’t do that. But the most compelling
reason I’d like to actually put forward is the last reason, how
many more headlines do you want in The New York Times about
the putrid, rotting mess that is CA certificates? How much do
you really want to rely on the security of this entire system by a
bunch of fanciful bits that time after time, we see structural
lying?
Why does Google no longer have CNIC in its set of trusted CAs?
Because CNIC authorized some Egyptian mob to put up a
certificate for start dot Google dot com, so that that mob could
then come and spy on Egyptian users. The CA system has been
abused and continues to get abused continuously.
We have an answer, the answer is [Dane]. Actually put the keys
in the DNS, and protect the lock with DNSSEC. We know how to
do it efficiently with stapling. We can do this quickly and we can
do this effectively. We can get rid of the middle men industry of
institutionalized lying.

Page 65 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

If we did the whole lot in TLS, you would actually have
something that is worthy of your trust. What you don’t have,
today, is anything remotely worthy of your trust. So DNSSEC is
not the answer, it’s part of a building block, but it’s part of a
building block of taking security of users, and the usage of the
internet seriously.
With the CA system we currently have, and the DNS we currently
have, it’s just an open warfare of institutionalized lying, and it’s
not helping anyone. Next. So, having resolvers validate the
answer and sending [inaudible] isn’t enough either. Turning on
a recursive resolver is fine, but quite frankly, if I can get between
you and your recursive resolver, I can lie anyway. Next.
So let’s raise it a little bit further. Your application should be
paranoid.

Get DNS is the obvious way to go.

Have the

application validate what it’s trying to do, because the
application should trust nothing. It shouldn’t trust the platform.
Apple might be lying to it, so might Android for all it knows. Your
ISP might be lying.
Do your own validation. Secure the conversation. Don’t run it in
the open. Have a look at DNS dot Google dot COM and think
about why they’re doing this. There is a very, very good reason,
it’s all about you and your interests. Hiding your DNS stops folk
intruding into it, and inserting lies. And quite frankly what we

Page 66 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

need to do is reintroduce, because they tried it once in Chrome,
and it should come back, reintroduce [Dane] inside the
browser’s part of the call.
I see dot DE has just done [Dane]. I saw an announcement last
week, and all I can say is, that’s a damn fine move, and the rest
of you should be looking at this, because if you’re taking security
seriously, and want to tie keys against domain names, why not
put the key in the DNS with the domain name you’re looking at?
And secure the lock with DNSSEC?
We have no better solution out there, then CAs that’s just a
remarkably stupid compromise, that put the money and the
control in all of the wrong places. Is there a next? Is there
another one? No, thought not. That’s enough for the rant. Back
to you Russ, thanks.

RUSS MUNDY:

Thanks Geoff.
[APPLAUSE]
As always, interesting and stimulating discussion there, but I am
sorry I skipped you. We’ll make up for it in the question time, I’m
sure. So next we have Mauricio from Costa Rica. And I do
remember when we had the ICANN meeting in Costa Rica, it was
an excellent meeting, and we had an excellent participation in

Page 67 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

the DNSSEC workshop from the dot CR folks. So thank you for
joining us again.

MAURICIO OVIEDO:

Thank you very much Russ, and glad you enjoy the meeting. I
will be held in the last LACNIC meeting, last week in September.
So [inaudible] announce so you can also join us there. So, this is
my first DNSSEC meeting with you here, so just wanted to
provide an update of what we have so far. And hopefully, it will
lead us to continuing to improve the DNSSEC system that we
have.
So basically, we start with DNSSEC in 2012. We implemented it
since then. We have continued to improve the system that we
have. So we added full key ceremonies to the process. We also
added the DS publication automation through the NIC dot CR
website. And then we continue with some changes with NSEC
three, and since 2012, [inaudible] associated to DS publication.
So, as one of the biggest changes, and this is what I wanted to
share with you, is that since 2014, we changed the way that we
were signing the domains. Basically we moved from the TPM
system that we were using, to [inaudible] for key generation,
and then we’re also using server signing for using DNSSEC
signed zone.

Page 68 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So right now, what we use, or what we do is to create 2048 bit
keys, both for key signing keys and zone signing keys. Then
twice a year, we have the full ceremonies. One is for the TLD.
And then the second ceremony is for the second level domains.
And then during this ceremony, what we use is the, of [inaudible]
we use a modified version of the DVD that was published by
Richard Lamb.
So it’s open, it’s free, and it’s ready to use. So basically what we
do is to create one key signing key. We use it just for one year.
We roll the key signing key each year, and then at the same
moment, we create five different zone signing keys. The time
that we use them is around 2.5 months each. Then we have key
bundles created at that moment.
So it’s basically, each bundle will last 15 days, and we roll it
every 10 days. When we have all of the necessary material to the
ceremony, we transfer security to the server that’s going to do
the signing, and we also have [inaudible] scripts. Some of them
were contributed by Richard Lamb as well, to automate the key
bundle rollover process. So basically we have a very simple
administration process.
We just do it once a year. We generate the whole material that
would be used, and we do constant rollovers of all of the
information. So, some of the benefits that we saw moving into

Page 69 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

this system, the first one is that basically the key signing key
never leaves this marker, so we create the key signing key on
this marker with the same thing with the zone signing key.
We create the key bundle material, but the private part of the
key signing key never leaves this marker. So once the ceremony,
key ceremony is over, the key signing key is putting into the safe,
and then it never touches the internet. Then it’s very easy to
replicate. We were thinking on something that our customers
could use, and could be flexible enough so that they can come
up with a solution that could provide high security, but at the
same time, that could be combined with other options, for
example, in-line signing.
So, the important thing that we consider is that basically we’re
looking for a cost effective solution. In this case, when we
implemented it, we didn’t have to buy anything, other than
these markers, which are very cheap. And then what we use is
the existing infrastructure that we have. One way is to use the
servers themselves. You can also [inaudible] where [inaudible]
in almost everything.

So this also come up with the fault

[inaudible] system, and with this markers, depending on the one
that you use, is very, very easy to create backups.
So in case you have any problem, you will have the system ready
to respond in the end. So the last point is that we also saw a

Page 70 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

very high increase in efficiency. This pick was quite good. With
the previous system, it was taking around 10 minutes to sign
everything, and now it turned down just a couple of seconds.
And finally, some challenges that we have seen during this
process is that sometimes when you think on implementing
DNSSEC, probably you can think on money.
Would it cost a lot? Would it be very difficult to handle? Not
necessarily the case. In our case, it wasn’t like that, and with the
option that we have right now, it was very, very cheap to
implement it in a secure way. Then another challenge we have
identify is that we speak about DNSSEC on different places,
conferences in some talks in universities. We have done DNSSEC
workshops, in fact, the whole point of changing DNSSEC process
that we were using was a result of a workshop that was held in
Costa Rica, along with ICANN, and [inaudible] resource center.
So we have done a lot of work on teaching people about
DNSSEC. However, still we have less than 1% of domains signed.
So I think that’s the constant of most of the registries, and
definitely there is something else that we should be looking at,
and that we should be doing.

Probably lack of technical

knowledge about DNSSEC, could be a reason, but still, not
everyone should know about DNSSEC.

Page 71 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So if we would like to see more domains signed, I think we
should provide more options for people that it’s not that
technical to get into DNSSEC, but it’s still use technical
resources. So something we are thinking is to include within our
system, our way, so the people can configure their zones, and to
be automatically signed by DNSSEC.
So this way, they can have DNSSEC without getting to know the
protocol itself. And then, last point, is that probably things will
continue to change at the beginning, signing with DNSSEC was a
very manual thing. Now we are getting to see more and more
tools that automate the process and make it much more easier,
in-line signing, and other options.
So probably things will continue to get better, the faster way
that we have seen, but at least, from the dot CR, what we are
trying to do is to look for different options so that we can add
more people. That’s just a very quick update, and thank you
very much.

RUSS MUNDY:

Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
Well, that was interesting. Very good progress report from when
we had the ICANN meeting, thank you.

Page 72 of 143

Last on our panel

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

presenters is Nick Shorey, and so we’ll turn right over to Nick.
Go ahead.

NICK SHOREY:

Thank you very much. My name is Nick. I am from the UK
government, and I sit on the GAC, who are in session now on
some other bits and pieces. Just before I sort of start and launch
into a brief chat, can I just get a show of hands, I don’t know
many of your faces. Who here is from the GNSO community? If
you can just stick your hand up.
Okay, great. And who here is sort of numbers community? As
well? Okay. Who here is from the GAC? Just me, okay. Right.
That’s really helpful. And SSAC people? Okay, the SSAC people,
good. And ALAC? Anyone here from the press? No? Okay, great,
so I can be quite liberal in my comments.
Right. So my name is Nick. I work for the UK government and
I’m on the GAC.

Prior to that, I used to be a cybercrime

investigator. So I used to see the kind of, the end results of some
of the small incidents or big incidents when attacks are made
against the DNS. I’m here today not as DNSSEC expert, that is
the one thing I can concretely say I’m the dumbest person on
this panel.

Page 73 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

But I’m here as someone who recognizes that this is quite
important, and I think from a sort of, from that sort of high level
concepts from government, in improving the security of the
global addressing system, is a priority for all of those who
support the continued evolution of this multistakeholder
approach to internet governance.
When things go wrong with the internet, when people can’t get
access to certain services, when they see attacks, they get their
machines infected, they lose trust. And people have alluded to
that word before. And they lose trust, and when they lose trust,
they ask questions. Why isn’t this working for me? And they
start to look towards certain answers.
And governments as well.

If they sort of don’t necessarily

understand sort of the underlying principle of why something
might happen, they will ask questions of the organizational
structure. How did this…? How is this allowed to happen? How
can we change the structure to make sure this can’t happen
again? Those are the sort of kind of questions that people can
ask, but then the technical people be like, oh no. it’s because
you just didn’t deploy the DNSSEC.
But people sort of immediately jump and ask these big
questions. So I’m coming in here, joining the GAC. I’ve been on
there for a year, and I’m sort of starting to sort of hear all of

Page 74 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

these things and talk to people. So my interest here is less
around the sort of technical [inaudible] of something because I
don’t understand that detail. I’m doing my best to learn.
But for me, it’s quite interesting to hear what Mauricio was just
speaking about in terms of the capacity building work that he’s
been doing running his workshops, and some of the challenges
that they’ve faced with that, and some of the opportunities that
they’ve identified as a result.
In the UK, I’m not going to speak in detail about [inaudible],
there are much better people in the room who can do that, but
they were one of the sort of early adopters of DNSSEC, and
they’ve done a lot of work in this space. They’ve provided sign in
services for years, and they’ve seen, you know, sort of a steady
increase in their adoption.
I won’t talk in detail about what they’ve done. But they’ve been
very active, and I think that’s been incredibly positive, certainly
for the UK. There is an off-com report from back in 2011, that
looked at this issue in quite some detail in the UK. And they
cited a number of obstacles that they’ve identified through their
studies. And I think one, which has already been picked up
upon, really was around sort of the economic and commercial
benefits or implications being sort of one of the barriers for this.

Page 75 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And the difficulty in quantifying, you know, where is the value in
this? It’s not something that we can necessarily see as, you
know, as being able to make us loads of money. But there is a
cost to deployment, and a cost to maintaining, and sort of
updating resigning keys, etc. So that was one of, whether it was
two or not, and we can debate that, that’s one of the perceived
barriers.
That lack of being able to sort of really quantify the benefits in
economic and commercial terms of doing something. When I’ve
had conversations with sort of other folks around this area as
well, it’s… What has been quite interesting to me, I remember I
met some people at RIPE, and they told me they operate a
business where they buy an old kit from sort of the US and the
sort of UK and Europe, and they sell that old kit, that old
hardware, you know, sort of at a knocked down price, to sort of
develop in states. And on the one hand, that’s great. That
allows maybe people to get online, to afford that kit that they
don’t have, but I can imagine on the other hand, there are
probably some security flaws, or it’s sort of outdated firmware,
and hardware, and software, which may impact the ability to
properly deploy sort of not just DNSSEC, but ways of other
security protocols.
And there is a risk that we’re just kind of making the same
mistakes again, as we’re trying to push versus sustainable

Page 76 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

development. And that, to me, seems just a missed opportunity.
Yeah, so there are those kinds of issues, and then there is also
the government ones. So there is me. I’m here, I don’t know a
huge amount about this, but I’m on the GAC.
But I don’t do, in my department, the direct policy engagement
with my ISPs, that’s another team that do that. And so they have
less, they’re not engaged directly here at ICANN. Again, they’ve
got sort of limited understanding. It would probably be fair to
say around sort of the technical detail of some of these issues,
they’re looking at this from a high level policy perspective.
So it seems to me, one of the real challenges is how we better
engage with governments, because governments have access
to, you know, at a senior level, to you know, the ISPs, the
registries, registrars. If you guys are having trouble getting
resources, or the other people having trouble getting resources,
governments have that kind of that way in at the high level. And
they have, maybe if they don’t sort of have all the regulatory
power, or choose not to exert that, they’ve got that influence.
They’ve got, they’re meeting the senior folks, and they might be
able to push this. Sort of do a bit of better engagement with
government, draw out the core messages, what does this really
mean for you in that big picture term of doing this small thing?
What’s the big picture thing?

Page 77 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And I don’t get the sense that that’s necessarily happening, and I
would cite my case evidence is the lack of government people in
this room. I don’t know if you guys agree. And I think, yeah,
there is more that we can do maybe around this sort of outreach
coordinated, capacity building stuff, people sort of often seem
to talk about sort of the key-less simplistic solution, which is just
going to make it really easy for the end user to sign their zone,
and sort of automate it without sort of having to get down into
the deep technical detail that they don’t necessarily understand.
So I’m here to maybe offer a little bit of a perspective, if I can,
from a government place, but I’m also here to listen. And for me,
I think, that’s the key thing, and hopefully take your messages
back around some of these bigger challenges, not necessarily
just in the technical detail, but some of the broader capacity
building challenges back to the governments later during the
week. Thank you.

RUSS MUNDY:

Thank you, Nick.
[APPLAUSE]
Appreciate that, Nick, and it’s always good to get an additional
perspective on how we’re having challenges that have to get
met here. And I think we have some people coming to the mic,

Page 78 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

which is great, but let me kick off the question session to
Mauricio. We had, at the CR meeting, we had a bank, and I forget
which bank it was in Costa Rica, they announced that they were
going to use DNSSEC as part of their security mechanisms.
Could you make any comment on whether or not they’re
continuing to do that? And has it spread or not gone anywhere?
Especially with the small percentage that you were talking
about.

MAURICIO OVIEDO:

Sure. This is the Costa Rica National Bank. And yeah, indeed,
they signed their domains, and have kept DNSSEC since then,
since 2012. So they continue with signing, and we continue to
support them, but still, the main problem is that the number
doesn’t increase fast, right? So we are having conversations
with the government institution that regulates or that handles
the economic part of the banks itself, so they can see the benefit
of having DNSSEC within the financial institutions.
So it’s one of the efforts that we are doing. They still have
DNSSEC, yeah.

RUSS MUNDY:

Page 79 of 143

Good, thanks. Eberhart.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

EBERHART:

Okay. The point, I like smart [cards?]. I play with smart [cards],
and the point in Costa Rica is, that particular bank uses a similar
smart [card] as the same reader for their own security features
to do your internet banking. So if you use them, you can use
exactly this combination to do DNSSEC.
Now I wanted to address Nick a little bit.

I come from a

developing country, [inaudible], and we have a more cynical
approach on this outdated hardware. It’s digital landfill. It’s
cheaper to send this to [inaudible] so that we then get to do
something then to dispose of it, environmentally friendly, under
environment legislation in Europe or in America.
Never mind what is even upsetting then is that, an amount of
money is assigned to the value of this, and that is then sort of
deducted from the development budget that has been given to
each developing country. I was personally involved in having to
figure out how to restore services to a school when their
manager left, outdated hardware, running some form of old
version of Red Hat, and it was just a total, total mess.
And eventually, even our government figured out that it was
cheaper in the long run, and more efficient to turn [inaudible] for
proper hardware, and not rely on this crap that is being sent in a
purely arrogant manner, that we have to be grateful for having

Page 80 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

to dispose of this, despite our Constitution having a provision for
being environment friendly.
I’m not criticizing you in anyway, I fully appreciate that you
mentioned it and that you were critical about it, but I just
wanted to reinforce the point, this is something that we really
cannot accept.

NICK SHOREY:

If you sort of hang on for a sec. If I can ask a question back to
you, and you know, how much…? You know, to what extent is
to say are you seeing this as being a real issue, in sort of, you
know, the broader term of Africa then? I don’t know what the
statistics around the amounts of kits that is being shipped and
how much of the budget, as you say, is being carved off for this.
Can you give me any indication of the extent of the issue?

EBERHART:

I don’t know.

It came to my personal attention.

I’m a

gynecologist by profession. When in one hospital, the trolleys to
bring patients to the operating theater were replaced by Finland
as a donation in fact, and I don’t… They just don’t last as long
as the things there that we had for the last 30 years. It takes two
years and they’re broken.

Page 81 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

I don’t know. But in poorer countries, now maybe it’s on the
middle economic level, it’s not really a poor country, we have a
big split on the [inaudible] between the haves and have not. I
live a very sheltered life with several cars, several houses, can fly
business class if I want to. But the poor people in our country
are very poor.
Fortunately our government has decided that a few times, we
don’t want this anymore because these things don’t last, and I’m
not criticizing Finland for making a donation, I’m just, that’s how
it came to public attention because the trolleys, after one or two
years, they were just, it just did not take the stress of how we do
things.
And given outdated equipment to schools, it’s unmaintainable.
And then we are expected to be thankful that we get something,
not from your presentation, but that’s the usual. And what’s
really upsetting, money that could actually be used for
something is then sort of artificially debited from the… We give
you [inaudible]…

We give you 25,000 bucks worth of

equipment, and the rest was just paper money. That’s really
upsetting.
I’m not saying we should get more money, or we should get any
money, but we should not get crap, and then be expected to be
thankful for it. That’s the point I wanted to make, and I fully

Page 82 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

appreciate what you’re saying. This is sort of coming through to
reasonable development agencies, UK, [inaudible], we see this
all of the time.
If a project is American, we find Jeeps, if it’s German, it’s the
same people driving [inaudible]. If it’s the Japanese, they drive
Toyotas. It’s always the same. The money, basically we get so
and so, but the money gets basically back to the country of
which the concerns are coming from and so on. That’s not really
DNSSEC, but it’s development, but since you raised the point,
I’m very grateful and stand here and have about five minutes
longer than your presentation was.
[LAUGHTER]

RUSS MUNDY:

Thanks Eberhard. Let’s go on to the next question please.

MARK:

Mark [inaudible]. One thing that surprised me a bit was that
black lies should not become a standard of the internet. That’s a
different point. A question to Geoff, have you tried talking to the
ISC and/or Linux distributors to make validation a default?

Page 83 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

GEOFF HUSTON:

Certainly ISC and I have a continuous conversation, and there
are probably some ISC folk either in the room or close by. I’ve
worked with them a fair deal on what the default choices are
and why, and certainly the currently conversation is actually
about a set [inaudible] option that sits inside the ISC code, that
as soon as it runs v6, it draws it down to 1280.
And I suppose my point is, if you’re running UDP, that’s actually
the wrong thing to do in my view. There is too much other stuff
out there that doesn’t like it. The other part of the conversation
is actually about, if I stand up a resolver in both four and six,
what should a validating resolver do against that service or an
authoritative name server?
Currently, even though about half the world’s resolvers will do
v6, less than 5% prefer to use v6. Now, as long as we’ve got this
idea that the dual stack world will last forever, bullshit, you’re
okay. But at some point, that’s going to be a lie. At some point,
you’ve got to confront the truth that the internet is going to have
to run on v6 and v6 alone, probably in your lifetime, probably in
mine.
So this stuff needs to work. Now, the thing about DNSSEC and
the way this works is DNSSEC inflates the answer. There is no
getting around that. And what we’ve found, and actually the
question back to Dani, how did you do that on the fly? They use

Page 84 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DCC. In other words, they’re using elliptical curves to get it back
down again, because we’ve really got a problem with deep
packets and UDP, and quite frankly, in v6, there is no satisfactory
answer.
And the trick is, how can we have adequate security? Keep all of
the responses under 1280? And make this damn thing fly on six?
If you can get those three going, we’re doing brilliantly. But I
suspect elliptical curve in DNSSEC go together is part of the
answer.

MARK:

So at the end of the day, it’s not as simple as turning it on?

GEOFF HUSTON:

Nothing is ever that simple, no.

RUSS MUNDY:

Next, we have a question from the chat room that Julie will read
for us. Thank you Julie.

JULIE HEDLUND:

Thank you Russ. This is Julie Hedlund. So there is a question in
the chat from Peter Van Dyke from Power DNS, and the question
is for Ari-Matti from FICORA. He asks, “Will you be dropping the
requirement for authoritative to respond to RR Sig queries?

Page 85 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Right now, this is preventing CloudFlare customers and power
DNS users from using DNSSEC in dot FI at all.”

ARI-MATTI HUSA:

Actually I don’t know an answer to that question, but we are
relaxing the requirements for the name servers. But I have no
answer to that specific question, no.

RUSS MUNDY:

Okay, thanks Ari. Dan, we need to move quickly because we’re
about out of time here. Go ahead.

DAN YORK:

Okay, well then, I’ll just say too for Finland, we do have to
acknowledge that when you guys signed dot FI, that was the first
time I had ever seen anybody Tweet out pictures of a cake,
celebrating the signing.

That was something that warrants

there. And Mauricio, thanks for coming back and talking about
Costa Rica.
Nick, I just want to say, I think you’ll find everybody here, we’re
very interested in talking and working with governments, in
working with folks around that, because we have had that as
one of the discussions. And some, we’ve had in different venues

Page 86 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

and different places. We’ve discussions around… How do we
work with it? How do we do it?
So all of us here would love to talk to you more about that in
some way shape or form.

My question for Dani was, you

mentioned the black lies work with, doing that within IETF.
Where is that within the IETF process? I saw a draft is up in DNS
op or something?

DANI GRANT:

Yeah, the draft is up. It’s like so early, early days.

DAN YORK:

Okay. So it will probably be in DNS operations, I assume is
where it would be. Okay. We’ll look for it there.

RUSS MUNDY:

John, go ahead please.

JOHN LEVENE:

I will attempt to be concise. I’m John [Levine]. I always ask the
same questions, so I’m going to ask it again. I have a tiny DNS
system where I have 250 zones and they’re all signed locally, but
only half of them are actually signed because I can only get the
DS records into half of the upstream servers, for which I am
either the registrant or I am a registrar reseller.

Page 87 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

For the rest of them, they delegate the DNS to me, but since I’m
not the customer, and I’m not the registrar, there is no way for
me to tell the up level zone, like here is your DS, so for anybody
who is a registry or registrar, I can’t be the only person with this
problem. What are you going to do about it?

RUSS MUNDY:

Anyone on the panel want to…? Go ahead Geoff.

JOHN LEVENE:

…maintain DS, which is fine if you already have a DS.

GEOFF HUSTON:

One of the other options that is being kicked around inside the
internet and the IETF drafts, is to see the DS record and similar.
Because you are the delegated domain and you control that, you
can place, this is the candidate DS record parent, please come
and look at me and drag it back up again, because you’re not
alone in having this problem. And the thing is, [inaudible] put in
S records, in the parent to say, it’s you, the reason they’re not
allowing DS is some kind of stuff out there that we can’t fix.

JOHN LEVENE:

Page 88 of 143

Or it might not really be me, or something.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

GEOFF HUSTON:

Well like that, but I like the CS approach myself, that it’s your
zone, putting in the candidate record, and get the parent to
periodically query and lift up the current value, that allows you
to change keys, all of those things and then back under your
control. So to my mind, it seemed like a nice answer. I don’t
know where it is in DNS, but it’s in there somewhere.

JOHN LEVENE:

There is a draft.

GEOFF HUSTON:

Yeah, there is a draft.

DANI GRANT:

We have the exact some problem. So we have all of these
customer zones that we started sign, but because we’re not the
registrar for these zones, we can’t send the DS ourselves. We
need the customers to go to the registrars, to log in, to add the
DS, and some of these registrars do not any have an interface for
the DS. They need to be sent over email, or maybe they don’t
accept DS at all.
And so, we’ve published this draft, it’s in DS [op]. And that’s
exactly the idea. We publish CDS, we ping the registrar, and they
go and check DS and grab it from there.

Page 89 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Is that Oliver’s draft or a different one?

DANI GRANT:

It’s Olivier’s draft.

RUSS MUNDY:

Jack can help. He’s working on that space also, right down to
your right.

DANI GRANT:

As is Paul.

RUSS MUNDY:

Okay. I think we’ve used a little bit more than our time here on
the panel, but I want to thank again all of our presenters.
[APPLAUSE]
And please do continue to come join and participate. If you
can’t be in person, do it remotely, but we love to get this broad
set of participation. Thanks folks, and next we’ll move on to
Matt Larson and Duane Wessels to talk about key rollover, key
changing activities.

Page 90 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

MATT LARSON:

Good morning everyone. I’m Matt Larson, I’m VP of Research at
ICANN, as of week four, week five now at this point. So happy to
be here and talk to you about rolling the root zone KSK. As you
can see from the agenda, Duane is also going to take, Duane
from Verisign is going to talk about increasing the size of the root
zone DSK, and I guess we’re doing this alphabetically so I’m
going first, even though chronologically, what Duane is going to
talk about, is going to happen first.
So we’re doing this in reverse chronological order.

His

presentation is also longer than mine, so this probably makes
sense. Next slide. So, I look out and see all of the usual suspects
so I’m going to go fast here because I don’t want to tell you
things you already know, but the root zone is complicated and
unusual in more than one way. One of which is the way it’s
administered, and that’s, there are multiple parties that are
contributing to make the root zone happen.
ICANN is the IANA functions operator. From a DNSSEC
perspective, it manages the KSK and has done so since we
signed the root in June of 2010, July of 2010. June of 2010. And
so the quarterly, we bring out the KSK and sign the new KSK
because that rolls every quarter.

Verisign is the root zone

maintainer. They actually sign the root zone on a daily basis,
twice daily basis.

Page 91 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

They of course manage the ZSK. And the root zone DNS key is
managed in these 10 day slots. So there is, every 10 days, there
is a new set of signatures. And then let’s go on to the next slide.
So, as I said, the size of the root zone, ZSK, is increasing. That’s
what Duane will talk about in a moment, and that’s happening
first. But after that happens, we are changing, or rolling the root
zone KSK. So these are separate activities, but what we call the
root zone management partners, which is basically Verisign and
ICANN, we’re coordinating closely to make sure that all of this
happened smoothly, and one of the things we’re doing is not
changing two things at once.
So that’s why the ZSK is rolling first and then the KSK. So why
change the KSK? The main reason is operational preparedness.
As everybody knows, from DNSSEC perspective, there is no
expiration dates on key material. You can use the same key as
long as you like. There is certainly no weakness at this point,
you know, I know from ICANN’s perspective, we’re very proud of
how we manage the root zone key material, and you know, we
have a real open process that we think that hopefully
establishes a lot of trust in the community for how the key is
maintained.
So, we don’t have any concerns about the key either from a
management standpoint, or from an algorithmic standpoint.
But it is a bad cryptographic practice to have any key live

Page 92 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

forever. So we do need to roll it at some point. In the DNSSEC
practice statement for the root zone KSK operator, that
describes how the key material is treated, it does talk about a
five-year interval for the lifetime of that key. You know, five
years or as circumstances allow.
So it’s time to roll that key when we sign the root zone. Back in
2010, when I was wearing a Verisign hat instead of an ICANN hat,
we always had the intent that the key wouldn’t live forever, and
that we picked five years as a reasonable timeframe based on
the lifetime of some of the cryptographic hardware we were
using to store the key.
So it’s time to roll the key, and we’d rather do this under normal
conditions rather than under abnormal conditions, if there was
some kind of a compromise. So better to do it now, and do it in
an orderly, controlled manner. I mean, there is a challenge of
course, in that there are a lot of people involved.
Anybody who is doing DNSSEC validation has a copy of the root
zone KSK, and they need to change that key. And unfortunately,
there is no test environment that can cover all possibilities
because of the number of people involved. So let’s go on.
So here are some of the dates which we’re just now starting to
talk about publically. Ed Lewis, my colleague at ICANN, talked
about these at [inaudible] 67 in Chicago a couple of weeks ago.

Page 93 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So as I say, this is the first time now, and the first, for these first
recent weeks that we’re talking about these dates. So in the key
ceremony, a recorder, we have a key ceremony, as I said, where
the KSK comes out, signs the zone signing key for the
subsequent quarter.
So in Q4 of this year, the ceremonies typically happen in the
middle of the month, so probably the exact day hasn’t been set
yet, but in November this year, we’ll generate the new key
signing key. And then in the first quarter of 2017, the KSK is what
we’re going to call operationally ready, and that’s because we
have two key management facilities or KMFs.
One in the US East Coast, and one on the US West Coast. So the
current plan calls for the key to be generated in Q4 of this year,
on the US East Coast. It will be securely moved to the US West
Coast facility, and in that key ceremony, it will be imported into
the hardware security modules there, and then at that point,
that’s what we’re calling operationally ready, where we’ve got
the key securely stored in all of the places that needs to be.
In terms of one this is actually visible in DNS, because those
activities are, you know, they’re just administrative activities
that nobody can have any publically visibility to on a widespread
scale. So in terms of things changing in DNS, that will be July 7,

Page 94 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

2017, that’s the actual date when you’ll be able to see the new
key in DNS.
It’s actually going to be used to sign the DNS key or RSEP in the
following quarter, on October 11, 2017. And then from a RFC
5011 standpoint, we’re actually going to set the revoke and
revoke the key in January 2018. So as you can see from the
timescales here, this is going to be a drawn out, orderly process.
The cadence of things for root zone key management happens
on this quarterly cadence, because of the key center, you know,
we’re not trying to rush things, we’re doing everything a quarter
at a time.
And I should refer to the final blurb there, all of this is contingent
on the ZSK size increase going smoothly first. So here is a
timeline. The slides are available so you can examine this more
closely, and look at all of the fine print. But these show the
various phases. We’ve lettered the phases from phase 8 to
actually goes off the slide, because there is some administrative
things that happen at the end when the old key is actually
destroyed.
But in terms of the phases that are probably the most interest,
these are they. So this is kind of a recap of everything I’ve just
said. Each phase is designed to take one calendar quarter, but
as I’m about to talk about, we have plans for backing out and

Page 95 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

falling back if necessary. So at any point in this process, well at
almost any point, before we revoke the key anyway, we can
decide to stay in the current phase, if there is any operational
indication, we should do so.
Or we could even fall back. So if everything goes as planned,
there will be a one-to-one correspondence between phases and
quarters, but it is possible that a phase could last multiple
quarters, or that we could, hopefully not, go from one phase
back a previous phase. So as you can see here, I guess things to
highlight, you can see some of the activities here in green, at the
very bottom, highlights when some things, some visible changes
happen, when we get some packet size increases, and when the
rollover actually happens, and the revocation.
So you can see the way we design this process to happen back in
2010 when we signed the root to begin with, was that the ZSK
rolls happen every quarter at the boundaries of the quarter, and
then anything we need to do with a KSK happens in the middle
of the quarter. So even within a quarter, we’re never doing more
than one thing at once. The ZSK roll happens independently of
the KSK roll within a quarter.
All right, so as I said, we do have back out capability. We can
stay at a current phase or roll back if we want, until we actually
set the revoke bit on the key in the first quarter of 2018 at that

Page 96 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

point, because of the way RFC 5011 works, we can’t go back
after that. That’s the one point of return. And the way we’re
going to do this is that at each key ceremony, we will sign and
generate multiple sets of signatures. So we’ll have sort of a set
of contingencies, you know, because it’s such a big deal to have
a key ceremony and get all of the trusted community
representatives in place, and open the safes, and do everything.
We can’t, if there are any issues, do one of those when the issue
happens. We have to plan in advance for it, so that we have
various sets of signatures ready for whatever contingency we
envision. So there is going to be a lot of monitoring during each
phase, you know, we’re going to have near real time analysis of
root server traffic.

We’re going to be, of course, watching

mailing lists and social media for people reporting any issues.
You know, we’re in the process of developing criteria that will
trigger a fall back, and for all of this though, we’re going to use
our operational judgment. There is not going to be any absolute
criteria, partly because it’s hard to envision anything that could
possibly happen. So it’s going to be a combination of thinking in
advance for what sort of things we could envision that would
indicate problems, along with our operational good judgement
when it’s actually in progress to determine if it warrants any
particular activity, like staying in a phase or falling back.

Page 97 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So, the timing for this is, you know, from right now until the end
of this year, we’re presenting the plan and going to accept
feedback. And then once the new KSK is actually generated,
we’re going to be actually presenting the new KSK publicizing
the new key, and then what we’re encouraging everyone to do
throughout this entire process is to follow RFC 5011. That’s, at
the risk of giving operational guidance, we’re encouraging
everyone to use 5011 if at all possible, because then all this just
goes automatically and nobody has to do anything. It just
happens.
As I’ve just said, 5011 will make this all happen automatically for
you, otherwise obviously you will need to manually change the
KSK October 11, 2017, that’s the day when the new KSK actually
starts signing the root zone. So that’s the day by which, if you’re
doing anything manual, that’s sort of the flag day you’ll have to
have the new KSK configured in your validators then.
In terms of testing, we’ve got two different kinds of testing
environments that we’re working on.

One is targeted for

software developers. This allows people who develop code that
supports 5011 to test it. You know, one of the issues with 5011,
not an issue, but I guess it’s an issue from a testing standpoint, is
that 5011 has this long ad hold on timer, it’s called, it’s a 30-day
timer that you have to see a new key as a candidate trust anchor

Page 98 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

before you finally take action and go yup, I believe that, I’ll add it
as a trust anchor.
And that’s to avoid being potentially confused and being
spoofed into believing a new trust anchor. You sort of have this
paranoia, I’m going to wait 30 days before I really believe it. And
that makes it hard to do testing because if you’re going to test
things exactly as they would be in an operational standpoint,
that means waiting 30 days.
So a couple of different people have written test environments
that do 5011, but on a much accelerated basis. So if you can
change your 5011 software to reduce the ad hold on timer to a
much shorter interval, then you could watch a trust anchor will
happen, and test your 5011 software that way.
So Rick Lamb from ICANN and Warren [inaudible] from Google
have each written separate test environments that do 5011 on a
much more accelerated basis. So if you’re a software developer,
this is really more appropriate for you. You could test our RFC
5011 code and make sure that it can configure a particular key
as a trust anchor, and roll it. At ICANN, we’re going to be
developing our real time, what we’re calling a real time 5011
environment, that will actually do 5011 on a much slower basis,
with a real 5011, or I should say a real 30-day 5011 hold on timer,
so that somebody who is an operator could configure you know,

Page 99 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

not the root zone trust anchor, but the idea is that in a
production system, you could configure a trust anchor for a zone
deep within DNS that wouldn’t otherwise effect your operations,
because it’s a test zone that nobody is going to use.
But in your production systems, if you wanted, you could
configure this zone’s trust anchor, and then watch it roll on the
actual 5011 long scale timeline. And then here is the obligatory
information for how to contact us, and how to follow what’s
going on. So with that, I’ll turn it over to Duane. Why don’t we
take questions for both of us at the end?

DUANE WESSELS:

There will be no time for questions. I have like 40 slides.

MATT LARSON:

That’s why I wanted to go first.

DUANE WESSELS:

Okay, so yeah, thank you Matt. As Matt said, I’ll talk about the
changes to the zone signing key, upcoming. Next slide please.
That’s just the outline so next. This says kind of some stuff Matt
already said. This says that Verisign operates the zone signing
key, and ICANN operates the key signing key, and it talks about
what is it, it explains what is KSR, it’s a key signing request. And

Page 100 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

a SKR is a signed key response. These are actions that happen
during ceremonies. Next.
So again, these slides are a little bit dated from before the time
when ICANN and Verisign were presenting together. That’s just
to say that I’m really not talking about the KSK rollover, that’s
separate. So, this slide makes the point that the only thing that
we’re changing as part of the ZSK change is the length of the
key.
All of the other parameters are going to stay the same. It’s still
going to be the same algorithm, it’s going to be rolled at the
same intervals and so on. Next please. So this is the schedule.
Two of these things have already happened. Some testing has
already taken place, and [inaudible] number 25 happened in
May of this year where the two three ZSKs were signed, and that
was important because, during that ceremony, they signed the
very first larger key, which happens in the, it’s the pre-published
key.
It happens at the end of, right before Q4. Next please. This
diagram shows the schedule for the ceremonies. It just sort of
highlights the lead times and talks about what Matt said about
how this is all driven around these quarterly ceremonies. And it
explains our scheduling. Next please.

Page 101 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And this red circle highlights that pre-publish key that I was
talking about. So that little dark blue bit that sticks out to the
left there, that’s the slot during which the 2048 bit key is prepublished at the end of September. All right, so let’s go into
some more details. Again, each, for CSK purposes, each quarter
is divided into nine slots of 10 days each. Sometimes the ninth
slot is a little bit longer because quarters have more than 90
days.
The R-SIG record changes on each slot. And at the end of each
quarter, there is one slot which is reserved for the pre-publish
and the start of the next quarter, one slot is reserved for postpublishing the old key. And this has been going on for years and
years now, since the root zone was signed. And during those
ninth and first slots, the size of the DNS key message goes up a
little bit because of the pre and post-publish.
This diagram shows what a normal 1024 to 1024 rollover
schedule looks like. Next slide please. And here it just highlights
again, those slots, and when those responses increase in size.
So this is the plan for increasing to 1024, from 1024 to 2048.
That middle section is Q4 of 2016, and the green represents the
2048 bit as a yes K that will be introduced. Next please.
So the only thing that’s a little bit different is during that quarter,
we’re going to extend the post-publish period for the old key to

Page 102 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

give ourselves a little bit extra breathing room in case there are
problems. And this is text for what I just said. Next please.
So let’s talk a little bit about what it means to have a larger ZSK.
This chart shows the size of signed DNS key responses, and sort
of goes in order of how things will proceed timewise. So at the
top we have, sort of the normal situation where there is the
single ZSK, and the response size is 736 octets. When we do a
1024 to 1024 rollover, that goes up to 883. Then when we
introduce the 2048 bit key, that response size goes up to just
over 1,000, 1,011 bites.
During a period with a 1024, a 2048 bit ZSK with no roll, it will be
864. And then when we do a 2048 to 2048 roll, we’re up to 1139.
And then it will be the same for a KSK roll from 1024, or from
2048 to 2048.
However, during the times when we do a KSK roll and a ZSK roll
together, it goes up to 1414 octets.

And when the KSK is

revoked, which will happen about a year and a half from now, it
will be up to 1425 bytes. So that was just about the size of a DNS
key responses, but we’re also interested in, you know, the sizes
of other responses too.
So to investigate that, we took some trace data and replayed it
through name servers configured with various keys and signed
in various ways. Next please. So in doing that simulation, we

Page 103 of 143

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

EN
replayed 10 minutes’ worth of data, and looked at the responses
that came back, including the size of the responses and whether
or not they were truncated and fragmented and so on.
This work was done back in February, so all of this data was
from around that time, replayed 37 million queries. The data
was taken from A root, which was running at five sites listed
there. So one of the first things we looked at was fragmentation.
And as it turned out, there was almost no fragmentation. I think
something like point zero, zero two percent, a very small
number of responses had experienced fragmentation.
Next please. A lot of these were due to any queries, of which
there were very few in this trace period. And there were some
other types of queries actually, two that experienced
fragmentation. But I can go into more details later on that.
Truncation is a little bit different. Truncation happens when,
you know, the responses can’t fit in the advertised client buffer
size. So here the green shows a case for a 1024 bit ZSK, and the
far left shows the normal situation, with no roll over, and the
darker green shows what it looks like during a ZSK roll.
So it goes from two and a half percent to about five and a half
percent of DNS key responses get truncated. But it stays at that
level for all of the other times when we have a 2048 bit ZSK, so it

Page 104 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

will never get sort of above that level of five and a half percent.
Next please.
So again, that was just DNS key responses. And here is the
amount of truncation for responses overall. And in this case, it
depends only on which, the size of the key that’s being used for
signing. So, when we’re signing with a 1024 bit key, overall
about half a percent of responses experience truncation. And
when we switched it, 2048, they’ll go up to almost 1.4%.
Something else that depends only on the size, of the key is for
signing is the distribution for response sizes overall. So the red
here shows the distribution for 1024 bit keys, and the blue for
2048. Yeah, you can go to the next one please. And lastly,
something that’s maybe more interesting to organizations that
are operating root servers is the amount of bandwidth that they
will be serving.
So this represents the bandwidth for essentially a single letter.
Again, this data came from A root, and under today’s situation, A
root serves something like 250 megabits per second, but when
we increase the ZSK size, it’s going to go up to about 350
megabits per second.
Okay, I’ve got like three minutes to get through the fallback plan,
let’s go. So, you know, while we fully expect this to proceed
without incident, we’re prepared for certain unforeseen

Page 105 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

problems, and should it become necessary, we will fall back to a
known good state, which will be a 1024 bit zone signing key.
Next please.
So in order to make this happen, ICANN will sign two KSRs for us,
at two of their ceremonies. I said one of those has already taken
place, and the next one will take place in August. Briefly, criteria
for fallen back will have to be something unforeseen and
something that’s very serious, and something that couldn’t be
solved by having, you know, a small number of recursive name
servers temporarily disable validation.
So one of the first important milestones that we’ll encounter is,
at the start of slot nine in Q3 this year, that’s like September 20th,
I think, that’s when that larger key first gets published in the
zone, the pre-publish period. We’ll be watching that closely.
The next milestone will be the first day of slot one, Q4,
something like 12 days later, that’s when the zone begins to be
signed with a larger key. And it will take a while, of course, for
cached data to expire, so over the course of those days, we’ll
continue to watch that closely.
And then at the end of… Again, we have a three slot or about a
30-day post publish period for the old key, and that’s our point
of no return. When that key gets removed, then we’re staying on
the 2048 bit key. So this probably familiar looking diagram, you

Page 106 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

know, shows sort of the two paths here. At the top, is the path of
how we fully expect things to go, and the 1024 to 2048 bit
transition. And the bottom shows are fall back option.
So if necessary, we have all the signed keys necessary to fallback
to just a 1024 bit key. Next please. So again, we have the option
to do this fallback in slot nine during the pre-publish period, and
you know, this, if problems are going to happen, this would be
my preference for them to happen here, because this is very
easy to recover from. But we also have the option to do, next
slide please, whoops.
I guess it’s missing. But we also have an option to do the fall
back in that slot one. If we have to do a fallback in slot nine, we
just un-publish the new key and continue signing with the old
key, and then there would be no ZSK roll for the next quarter.
We would continue on with the older key. Next please. Here is
the slide I was looking for.
So, this just diagram shows the fall back during slot one, and if,
go ahead, next please. If we have to do a fallback here, we can
revert to signing with the old key, and we can continue to
publish the larger key for a while, depending on the nature and
severity of the problem. And next. So the last thing I want to
mention before we take questions is that, we have a sort of a

Page 107 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

very simple tool, website, called Key Size Test dot Verisign Labs
dot COM.
Next please. Which you can go to, and it will do some URL
fetches to domains that are signed with larger keys, and tell you
if they’ve all been successful. If you go there, you should see
something that looks like this. If you don’t, I’d be very interested
to know and talk to you, and help you find out what’s going on.
So that’s the end of my talk, and we now have about two
minutes for questions.
[APPLAUSE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

[Inaudible] Let’s stay away from the technical stuff.

As an

irregular observer at the key signing ceremonies, East and West
Coast, when you get to do the new CSK, sorry, KSK, what
happens if a lot of people want to be an observer? That room is
only so big. Has this one been…

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

You’re looking at the wrong guy.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yeah, I know that [LAUGHTER]. You get the drift.

Page 108 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DUANE WESSELS:

Well, you’re right. The room is only so big. We can have a
limited number of observers. Everything about the ceremonies
is public. You know, they’re live streamed, there is an extensive
record of what happened at the ceremony, it’s all published.
The idea is to be absolutely as transparent as possible, and we
have the trusted community representatives that are there.
So our hope, as the new key, will be as with it has been all along,
that you know, those are people who hopefully the community
trusts, and there is more than one person there. The whole idea
is that nothing can happen without multiple people being
present, and also without there being a record of exactly what
did happen.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Oh no, I’m an absolute fan of the process, and the extensive
documentation, and commentary. I was just wondering, you
know, if you’ve thought this one through, do we end up in a
lottery situation? First come, first served?

DUANE WESSELS:

Page 109 of 143

Oh I see. What do you do if you want to be there as an observer?

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

And there is too many of us.

DUANE WESSELS:

That is a…

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

You’ve had some pretty packed rooms in the past.

DUANE WESSELS:

Yeah. I don’t…

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Who else wants to be there for this? We missed it five years ago.
Am I really the only geek that, okay, Alan, all right.

No

[inaudible], I have no problem. That’s, this is easy. I’ve got onehour flight, he has at least 27 hours.

So you know.

Just

something for you to think through amongst everything else.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

During the first ceremony, there very first, wasn’t there like an
extra room that people could go in and sort of be close but not
like be in the room?

Page 110 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DUANE WESSELS:

We did, we literally had overfill seating with closed circuit
cameras, and you could watch. But those of us…
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Yes, so those of us, there was a break. Those of us who were
smart were not there for the first part. I just watched for the first
part while they did all the gory setup, and then when we actually
generated the key, that was when I went in, you know, after the
bathroom break and everything. So there won’t be as much
setup, that was a one-time only event for getting everything all
set up.
So yeah, I’m not sure how that will work for, we won’t need to do
that all again.

DAN YORK:

Dan York. Just a quick thing. First Matt, congratulations on your
new role here with ICANN. And second, thank you for publishing
a schedule, so we can see, I mean, publically what the plan is as
far as giving out there, I think that’s important. So thank you for
that.

Page 111 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DUANE WESSELS:

You’re welcome, and this is not the last time. You’ll be seeing
me and a lot of other people a lot between now and when this
all happens. That’s the idea.

DAN YORK:

And I think that’s, you know, in all of the comments we’ve had
on this process, that’s the important part, right? Because I think
as communicating to people what the steps are and what the
time is, because we don’t know what that breakage might be, as
we go to that, in that period of time out there. So I think, I’m
glad you’re out there doing that, that’s definitely important.

JULIE HEDLUND:

Any other questions for Duane or Matt?
Then please me in thanking both of you and thanks for coming.
[APPLAUSE]
Next, we have a discussion on DNSSEC encryption algorithms
with Andre and Dan.

DAN YORK:

Hello.

I can use the clicker.

All right.

So, we heard

conversations here earlier today about why it was important to
sign with the elliptic curve algorithms.

Page 112 of 143

That’s a great

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

presentation. That’s awesome. Click to add title. We’re going to
click that to add a title.
So let me ask a question, how many people here have their
DNSSEC…? Actually, let’s ask this. How many people have their
domains signed? All right, of course, in this group, we look at the
percentage. Okay. High percentage. How many of you have it
signed with an elliptic curve algorithm?
Okay, a few, a couple of people, and a number of which are
suspiciously with CloudFlare.

So, we’ve been having this

conversation about why it’s important, and here we go. Look,
wow, cool.
Testing, all right.
Okay. So here we are, Andre and me. So we know, you know,
algorithms are used for the signing side. They’re in signatures,
they are used for the DS record, and they’re used for the
validation side. We have a whole bunch of them, of which we
see different conversations that most of them are not used. And
we’ve got elliptic curve and we’ve got ECDSA, which is out now,
and then we’ve got two others ones under development with
this gentlemen being the author of the drafts that are being right
there.

Page 113 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

We talked about this in Marrakech. I’m not going to spend more
time specifically around that. But we care about these because
they’re faster. We’ve heard this discussion earlier about they’re
smaller around the need for that as we go through that, and just
in general, better cryptography, better security as we look at
moving away from there.
The problem, of course, is there is many aspects to deploying
these new algorithms. You’ve got to have them validated by the
validators that are out there. You’ve got to have them in the
signing side of things, this hosting operators, the registries,
registrars, all of the folks involved have to play a part in this.
And so it’s a big, big thing.

So we’ve been having these

discussions. We started it back in Marrakech, we had a panel
where we talked about this before. We went on to, there was a
discussion at the DNS [inaudible] workshop in April in Buenos
Aires. We had discussion in different working groups at IETF 95.
There was a RIPE session. And now we’re here. And we’re going
to continue this drum beat to talk about it. We did capture some
of this in a draft that’s down there at the bottom, that I was
reminded we needed to rev for the next IRTF with some of the
feedback that were coming out of this discussion. But we have
this discussion and so, we thought, given that we have all of this
since last time, Andre and I, we talk a little bit about what we’ve

Page 114 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

seen, and I’m looking to him in one part, to talk a little bit about
what he sees in some of these things.
So Andre [inaudible] from [C NIC?].

ANDRE:

Thanks Dan. As Dan has shown, we had the discussion in the
Buenos Aries, DNS [inaudible], and it was, we the [inaudible] was
composed of DNS vendors. And well, there was also some
[inaudible] guys, then at the RIPE session we talked the
[inaudible] DNS providers, DNS hosts. And what I am hearing
from all of those people, and all the people from the audience,
the problem is that the DNS is viewed as a basic infrastructure,
and you don’t touch the infrastructure because something will
break.
And we need to change that. We need to change the perspective
into people’s eyes that the DNS is something that they need to
take care, like on a regular basis, that it’s not something you set
up in the 80s and it’s still running. And well, what we are looking
for, and what we are talking about is how to change the
perspective.
So if you have any other clever ideas, then what we’ve already
heard, the RIPE session was quite productive and there was
some suggestions to add this, to bundle this somehow together

Page 115 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

with the HTTPS testing, because that’s gaining traction now, and
everybody has used [inaudible] Labs and [inaudible] used to test
their websites, if they are correctly configured. And if you can
somehow convince those guys that the DNSSEC should be part
of this web test for web security, then that’s part of winning the
game.

DAN YORK:

So that was part of what they discussed at the RIPE session was,
how do we bundle that with that? So would that be something
like when, if you were testing, you would go to the…? Well, I
mean, we have sites like that now, that do some of that, right?
Like, Internet dot NL, or some of those that have the test of
DNSSEC along with it. But you’re saying for applications? Or…?

ANDRE:

Well, what I’m saying the people mostly care about their web
servers. So if you can show them that their web server is not
correctly configured, the DNS is not correctly configured as well,
then it will gain some attention.

DAN YORK:

How many people here have updated their DNS server recently?
The recursive resolver? This is the wrong crowd to ask, of
course, I know. So just curious. Okay. How many people have

Page 116 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

not even thought about their DNS resolver since they put it
installed in their network? How many people even know where
their DNS resolver is?
Okay. On his laptop. Russ indicates yes. Okay, this is the wrong
crowd to ask those questions. If we ask outside of this area, if
we ask the rest of, okay [inaudible] is showing me he’s got a DNS
resolver on his smartphone. Okay. Yes, this is the wrong crowd.
Okay?
But if we go… If you imagine we’re going out there talking to the
other people here at the ICANN meeting, how many of them do
we think have probably updated their DNS software any time
recently?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
DNS, what’s that? Was the comment from the side over there.
Yes, probably how many. Yes, Paul. It should be on. AV team,
we need the mic on.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

PAUL:

Hello? Okay. So sorry. I’m Paul [inaudible] at Red Hat. So one
issue I’m personally running into, I’m the maintainer of some of
the DNS software, is that especially with minor releases, for

Page 117 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

instance, for our product, if you go from [inaudible] seven to 7.1,
7.2, 7.3, that there is a strong desire not to update anything.
Those are sort of bug fixes and minor releases.
And DNS moves much faster, and I would really like to put those
updates in, and I get a lot of pushback not to do that, in those
minor releases. So what I would like people to do here, that do
pay for [inaudible], everybody runs [Santos?] including me, but
those who have a subscription to [inaudible], please file a bug,
so that I can actually have, you know, some customer reports
saying, “We need this update.”
Because otherwise, these updates will slow down, and they will
cost you your DNS server not to be updated whenever you type
update on your OS.

ANDRE:

Well Paul [inaudible] or there is an option by support and then
fill the bug?

PAUL:

That would be awesome too.

DAN YORK:

Well, and this is the point, right? Like you said, Andre. DNS is
one of those things that people are just thinking, it just runs. It’s

Page 118 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

not broken, don’t fix it. Don’t do anything to it, don’t, it just
works, right? So how do we help people understand that there
is, that it can be changed, that it should be changed? Anybody
out there?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Well my thought was to find some really nasty security bugs, and
give them [catchy?] names. That’s how it’s done in HTTP, right?

DAN YORK:

All right. So now we’re looking for really nasty DNS security bugs
that we can give cool names and logos to. Any takers out there?
You know, you’re actually, to be honest, there is an element of
that, that did occur, that would be something that would be
helpful. Other thoughts from folks out here? What do we do?
How do we help move this along?
What else came out of the RIPE meeting that you saw?

ANDRE:

Well, [inaudible] from IC was talking about cyber-insurance, that
it might be, well, something to look into. But it’s probably a US
thing, so I don’t even know what cyber-insurance is. Only the
folks from Comcast have it. And the other thought was there is

Page 119 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

something called PCI compliance. If you want to do online
payments, so it might include the DNSSEC as well, perhaps.
But I don’t know even how to do, approach those for.

DAN YORK:

Well, we’ve actually talked to some folks around the PCI
compliance side of things, in looking at some of the pieces there.
But that really only helps on the DNSSEC side. But the question,
this is this larger question of how do we get things updated,
right? Because we’re looking at… The last time, in Marrakech,
we talked about any cycle to get, if we would like to move more
and more to these new BC algorithms, etc.
You know, we’re looking at a scale of years before they’ll really
be able to be out there widely deployed, because we have to get
them out especially through the validation software, in getting
that out into all of the validators that are happening out there.
And that’s a good, large amount of work with regard to that.
Paul, you’re standing at the mic.

PAUL:

Paul again. So one of the big things that is keeping us on these
old algorithms, is the fact that the most commonly used DNSSEC
signing software doesn’t provide for an algorithm rollover, like if
you use open DNSSEC, you cannot roll to another algorithm. So

Page 120 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

people cannot do easily roll, unless you’re going to run two
servers and two different versions of the zones, and then sort of
manually merge them yourself.
So rollover, I think, is the thing that’s keeping these old
algorithms in the zones now. People are just stuck with it now.

DAN YORK:

Good point. Shane.

SHANE [CURR]:

Yeah, Shane [Curr], Beijing Internet Institute. Well, I hesitate to
suggest that we discuss the whole problem of agility in general,
which seems to be what you want to talk about. Because I think
that’s a big issue for protocols in general, for DNS in particular,
as an old protocol that has a wide deployed base, and is
[crusty?], and hard to work with, requires a certain amount of
expertise and things like that.
So I think, that’s an area that I’ve been particularly interested in
recently, and I think there are things that the DNS standards
community can do, and DNS engineering community to do. I
think it’s a real problem, and I think it can be solved. I have a
really hard time finding where that work, and where that effort
should start, and how it should move forward.

Page 121 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Maybe we can talk about this in another context. But I think, for
me, it’s a bit like looking at net neutrality, it’s like the real
problem is that there is areas in the world with fundamentally
no competition, and you use net neutrality as a proxy for that.
So likewise, we don’t have an algorithm agility in DNS, but that’s
really a proxy for the larger problem of not having ability to
change the protocol at all.

ANDRE:

I very much agree with what Shane said. And we even talk about
it, in more generally in the RIPE session, because there is new
thing coming to DNS like cookies and stuff like that. And it also
needs a softer upgrade on both sides. We need to find a way to
upgrade DNS more frequently.

And I think it was sort of

suggested that it might be a time to start thinking about DNS
two or something. [LAUGHTER]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

DNS v6, what?

DAN YORK:

And Shane you’re right, look at us when we’ve been trying to
push out ECDSA, and just finding that one of the biggest barriers
was all of the darn web GUIs in all of the registrars around the
world who didn’t have ECDSA as a choice for a DS record. Okay, I

Page 122 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

mean, you know, forgetting the whole just issue around the DS
record in general, just you know, web GUIs.
So how do you go around and get all of the web GUIs to go and
be updated to have one more item in their box? You know. This
is a big agility question. How do we make this move to bring
about a more secure DNSSEC and bring in these new algorithms,
when it comes down to, you know, somebody is going to
configure a web GUI somewhere? By a registrar who is not really
even paying any attention to DNSSEC, and they’re just doing it
because ICANN said they had to, in some way, to do this kind of
thing.

DANI GRANT:

Dani from CloudFlare. Is this on? I have doubts. I can do that
too. Okay. Cool. When we turned on DNSSEC, the biggest
problem we had with using ECDSA was the support from
registrars and registries. This came up in Marrakech, but there
was no real resolution. What is the reason for registrars and for
registries to do any validation on the algorithm number at all?
Versus just accepting any arbitrary value that a user inputs?

Page 123 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

DAN YORK:

Do you want to have one of the registries who does that? We
had a couple speak up at the event. Anyone want to talk about
that?
So, okay. So the reason why, that was given to me in a number
of cases by a number of different registrars and registries, was
that they have support costs of broken records, and they have
support costs when things, you know, when somebody puts in
the wrong info and it breaks, and all of this, and then they call
the registry, or they call somebody and they try and go and do
this.
And so, in many cases, the registrars or registries are providing
some kind of form validation on that, to protect themselves,
basically, from having to do any of the extra support work. You
know, they’re trying to minimize their costs to make sure people
aren’t putting in bogus records.

So that’s what’s been

presented.
Now, if any other registrar or registry wants to come up here and
say why they restrict the records instead of just taking
everything, they can. Oh, and here comes Peter.

PETER:

Peter [inaudible]. I actually promised to stay in the back, but
your comments was provocative enough to get me here. Mission

Page 124 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

accomplished. So what we do is, independent of DNSSEC, we do
certain checks on any delegation to maintain a high quality of
the zone, and also to protect our own infrastructure. Adding
DNSSEC to that means doing validation on the keys. So we need
to understand the keys. We do understand ECDSA, actually we
also understand [GOST]. I don’t understand [GOST], but we
accept the keys nonetheless.
The point here is, imagine that there was a massive influx of a
new algorithm or anything that is related to DNSSEC, and there
is a big mess up. I’m not really confident that that is actually
beneficial to the future, to the ongoing deployment.

So

exercising a bit of care on multiple stages is probably a good
thing to do. And so that, what we’re doing, and I can only speak
for [D NIC?] here, what we’re doing is very much in line with what
we’ve done before, and actually we’re not really trying to restrict
anybody, or restrict anybody’s choices, it just took some time to
deploy the software.
And that’s… While doing that, some libraries were updated and
so on and so forth. So it takes time. Taking time is something
that’s important here, and maybe while I stand here, my plea to
the standardization community is, stop fiddling with the
protocol.

Page 125 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

[Inaudible] dot DK. I hope [inaudible], but as far as I understand
you, only place we do validation on the keys is in the web
interface, and is a very basic validation. Is it long enough? A to
Z, zero to nine? Just because it’s a web interface and people
copy and paste and put things?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Other than that, I don’t think we do any validation on the keys.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
No, no, no, it’s on the key, the hash itself, just to check. If you
have this protocol, or this type, your hash needs to be this size,
just because you copy and paste, just to help the user. Other
than that, I don’t think we have a lot of validation.

DAN YORK:

Thank you for the… Go to the mic.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

And no, we don’t have [inaudible], I’m trying to work on that.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

DANI GRANT:

Since you are not doing validation, has it caused you any
problems? Like would you recommend this to other registries?

Page 126 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yes, we have about 1% signed domains, which is mostly one
registrar. So the rest is, [inaudible] to know what they’re doing.
So no, we haven’t seen any problem, because no one is using it.

DAN YORK:

All right. Well, on that note, I want to say thank you to Andre for
all the work he is continuing to do, and we will probably have
more of these discussions at IETF 96 in Berlin, in the [kernel?]
group or one of those, and we’ll continue to have this. And I
think, as a community, this is a question, this larger question of
agility, but also how do we move to some of these more secure
EC algorithms?
So thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
And with that, I think we need Russ up here as we enter into our
final little bit before we the great DNS quiz. I did see Roy in the
audience, so get ready to exercise your brains, or something.
Also, a reminder for folks who are new, you do need one of these
to go to the lunch today. The ushers will… You need one of
these that has this nice lunch on that side, there is a map on the

Page 127 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

other. If you don’t have one, the ushers won’t let you in, and we
thank again, these four people, the four companies that are on
here. If you see them, say thank you, because they’re buying
lunch today.
All right. So with that… Oh, these should be around on the
table. We kind of put them around in different places. There are
some more up front, there are some others, there are some
more in different places. So you can get one of those if you don’t
see them, we have a few more up here. We can get them to you.
So all right, this brings us to the conclusion of another DNSSEC
workshop, and so let’s go ahead with our slides here. Oh, I have
the clicker, okay. I have the clicker. All right.
So basic steps that we encourage everyone to think about, or
TLD operators to please sign your TLD. We want to fill in the rest
of that map and get the rest of these. We ask people to accept
DS records, work with the registrars. We also would like people
to make statistics available.
This is something we talked about earlier.

Some of these

different efforts that are out there, we’re just trying to track this
and see how things go. We’d like help with that. Let’s see. Russ,
I’ll give you, yeah.

Page 128 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

RUSS MUNDY:

Thanks Dan. Right, so almost everybody has a zone, or multiple
zones. Some of you a gazillion zones. Or a billion maybe. But
signing the zones is a critical step. So look at what you need to
do to do that. Depending on where you are, you may need to
work with your registrar. And registrars are doing more and
more becoming available, but that’s still, if you will, one of the
weakest spots in the overall DNSSEC chain, is support from the
registrar.
So work with and encourage a registrar to do what they need to
do, so that your zones can actually get out there, get published,
and again, statistics, statistics, we really want to learn more
what’s going on and be able to see more, collect more
information.

DAN YORK:

On the network service providers side, you saw Geoff Huston
come up here and say that fact that if you can’t turn on… What
was it Geoff? If you think it’s hard to turn on DNSSEC, you
should take up fishing, I think is what I captured there. All right.
So you know, yeah, it’s a little bit more involved because you do
now have to be prepared at least to answer potential questions
when people can’t get to sites that have issues with that, but
that is a critical step around that, so we do ask, you know…

Page 129 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

We want to see more of those registrars. Whoever is in Finland,
let’s talk to those other three large providers and see if we can
get them to turn it on here. We need to figure out those spots
where we can make those changes. And then, of course, sign
your own zones in some way. So one of things that I think we
got a bit of a flavor of, today, that on the panel, in particular, was
a broad range of spectrum. So I think we heard a number of
people saying various problems that they had.
I was thrilled that Nick was willing and able to join us and talk
about things from the GAC and the government perspective, and
I know sometimes people look at governments with suspicion,
and sometimes they probably ought to. But they are a member
of the community, and they have influence, access, and as Nick
said, that they can get to people and encourage them. And that
is something I think we may have heard a little bit more today
than what we’ve not heard in the past.
And I’m not sure if Nick has left yet, but one of the things that I
wanted to do, was ask him… Are you still here Nick? Ah, yeah.
To please raise this within the GAC. And continue to raise the
interest level. The US government has been a strong supporter,
but beyond that, I don’t know that there have been that many
pushing from the government side.

Page 130 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So please help us do that, and if people from the GAC want to
talk to anyone in this community, I think they’ll find them very
receptive. So, that was a little variant from what’s in the slide
this time, but I thought it was an important change, and a great
input that we had this time.

DAN YORK:

And on that note, we also want to encourage people to share
what you’re learning, and share it in the other sessions. The
pieces that are there. Question? Yeah.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

…I’m from a Finnish small ISP, and we’ve been running a
DNSSEC validating name server for about five years, because
originally local ISPs didn’t provide that service. And right now,
I’ve been thinking about taking part in a system called
[inaudible] DNS, which I’m hoping I’m going to get to talk to
people here. So, talk to me afterwards if you are involved with
this already.

DAN YORK:

Page 131 of 143

Did you hear that? Okay. Yes. Shane is one to talk to.

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

All right, thanks.

DAN YORK:

All right. And so, and on that, I mean, please do, bring things
that you’re doing, bring projects, bring items.

We’ll have

another one of these coming up at the next ICANN meeting. And
I want to just, let’s give a round of applause to everybody who
was part of the presenters here today.
[APPLAUSE]
It does take a certain amount of courage to come up and stand
up here and do this, and talk about what you’re doing and what
the kind of things are. So we greatly appreciate all of that today.
I want to give a special thanks again to our four sponsors, Afilias,
I see Jim in the back there. I see Jacques here for dot CA. I see
Christian here for SIDN, he’s somewhere.
Oh there he is, back there. Okay. And do we see anybody from
[Dine?], no? Okay, Matt was with [Dine]. But we thank them all,
and also do want to say too, we are looking for a fifth sponsor, if
you’re interested in doing that. It’s a relatively inexpensive cost,
but it just helps us ensure that we have the funding to be able to
do these lunches and pieces like that.
Again, the support for this comes from the SSAC, as well as from
the deploy 360 program part of the Internet Society. And these

Page 132 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

are websites, if you have not been to them, we encourage you to
go to them, and we have one last slide this time, which is to say,
afterwards, when this meeting ends, we encourage you to stay
connected, to be involved.
There is a mailing list for the, what we call the DNSSEC
coordination effort, which you can go to and join. It’s a public
list, you’re welcome to do that. We have a conference call on the
first, using that old phone technology, I know, although we’ve
been moving to zoom, we’ve been doing some things over it
now, video.
On the first Thursday of each month, where we’ve talked about
this and get a chance to talk, as a community, about where
we’re going with DNSSEC, and what we can do to advance it. So
we encourage you to join those efforts, and also to get ready for
Hyderabad for ICANN 57.
So I think with that, I also want to just say, thank you as well to
the people who are sitting here quietly. Julie and Kathy who
have both been our support in keeping this going, and
organized, and everything else. So please, let’s thank them.
[APPLAUSE]

Page 133 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

RUSS MUNDY:

And they’re the ones that really make this happen, because it
wouldn’t happen without the help of Julie and Kathy.

DAN YORK:

And so, with that, we want to bring up Mr. Arends for the great
DNS and DNSSEC quiz. And for all of those who have never
participated before… How many newbies do we have here in
the room? Who have never done a DNS and DNSSEC quiz? Okay.
Get prepared.

ROY ARENDS:

Does this work? Can we make this work?

DAN YORK:

Okay, what. is it turned on? The bottom?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
[CROSSTALK]
Okay, so here, one little detail. You know, I told you about this
sheet of paper that was floating around? Okay, the other sheet
that has the program on it, if you turn that over, Julie and Kathy
were very clever, and on the backside is where you can put in the
answers to the quiz that Roy is about to do.

Page 134 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

So, and if you don’t have one, grab some. There is a couple up
here, you can grab one there. Couple of more in the front. This
is an interactive participatory thing. So you need this sheet.
Now, I’ll leave it to you Roy.

ROY ARENDS:

Great, thank you. Can I have the first slide please? So, as Dan
said, use the back of the form to answer, to put your answers on.
You can play in a group, you can play on your own. Put your
name on the sheet as well. When we’re done, give it to your
neighbor so we can all check it, and we’ll all play in an honest
way.
And of course, if you’re checking the form, and this guy or girl
has all the answers correct, don’t change the name into your
own. At the end of this quiz, we’ll go through all of the answers.
Next slide please.
This is important. Sometimes more than one answer is correct.
So sometimes all of the answers are correct. Or sometimes none
of the answers are correct, and you have to figure this one out
on your own. Point is scored for each correct answer, and I think
there are 13 or 14 points to be scored in this quiz.

Page 135 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

If you have a wrong answer, and a right answer, so if you ticked
on two and one of them is correct, you lose all of the points
basically for that question. Next slide.
Okay, so start with number one of the questions. I’m going to go
through this pretty quickly so you don’t have time to check this
on the internet. Which of these top level domains do not deploy
DNSSEC? Is it dot [Tel], dot ZA, dot arrow, or dot Moby?
Is it A, B, C, or D? Next question please. What is TPC in TPC dot
[int] stand for? Is that A) Transition Policy Center; B) Technical
Program Committee; C) Trans-Pacific Cable; or D) the phone
company.
Okay. Question three. Which [int] domain does currently exist.
Is it A) [inaudible] dot [int]… I happen to be a European living in
England, for now, yeah. [Laughing] Oh, brilliant. B) IP6 dot [int];
C) Euro Fish dot [int]; or D) COT dot [int].
Next question please, thank you. This is an old one, you’ve seen
this before. What does the [obit] stand for in a DNS query? Is it
DNSSEC off? Is it DNSSEC on? Is it DNSSEC out? Or is it DNSSEC
[inaudible]? I remember, one time I did this slide, a couple of
quizzes ago, none of the answers were correct. And so you
couldn’t actually score a point for that. I thought I was cute, but
I shoot myself in the foot.

Page 136 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Anyway. Number five please. How many bits wide is a TTL field
of a DNS record? Is it A) 8; B) 16; C) 32; or D) 64? Next question
please. What is SOA as in SOA records, stand for? Is it A) the
source of authority; B) statement of authority; C) system of
authority; or D) start of authority?
Next question. How are we doing for time? Great, okay, perfect.
What does the CD stand for in a DNS query? This is an old one as
well.

Is it A) a compact disk; B) checking disabled; C)

cryptographic device; or D) change directory?
Next one please. A simple one. What does KSK stand for? If you
haven’t paid attention today, then I don’t know. Is it key signing
key? Is it kill switch key? Is it key switch key? Or [inaudible]? I
need to get rid of this question. This is getting old.
So this is slightly different then the questions we had, quizzes
before, so how many different root server operators, as in
organizations, not the individual folks, as in how many different
root server organizations are there? Is it A) 12; B) 13; C) 24; or D)
26? And for the last question, number 10. Which country, as in
which ccTLD, was the earliest to deploy DNSSEC? So not the
first, but the earliest. Was it A) United Kingdom; B) Sweden; C)
The Netherlands; or D) Germany.
Perfect. Thank you everyone. If you’ve… Make sure you’ve
filled out your name on top of the form, and I would like to give it

Page 137 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

to your neighbor. And if you’re sitting by yourself, just turn the
form 180 degrees clockwise. Sorry.
[LAUGHTER]
Oh by the way, the winner, just like every time, the winner gets a
free lunch. [LAUGHTER]
You can use this, and also you get, what was it again? Oh yeah,
eternal recognition. Right? Who remembers the last winner of
the Marrakech quiz? I don’t think anybody remembers that.

DAN YORK:

Who did win in Marrakech? Do we remember?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

ROY ARENDS:

Hey, there you go.

DAN YORK:

Duane, were you saying it was you?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
[LAUGHTER]

Page 138 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

ROY ARENDS:

Okay. I think we’re going to go back to question one.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Oh yeah, no, I have the answers. I can’t publish them on the…
So, which of these top level domains do not deploy DNSSEC?
Okay. I think none of these top level domains deploy DNSSEC.
So if you have A, B, C, or D, you are correct. You can get four
points if you’ve crossed off all of them.
Yes, this quiz also helps to shame top level domains. Okay. Next
question please. What did TPC and TPC dot [int] stand for? This
is D, the phone company. And if you’re interested in a little bit of
a backstory of that, come this afternoon to a presentation I
happen to give on abuse in dot UG. [Inaudible] says a little bit
about the phone company in there.
Next question. Sorry, this was answer D, the phone company.
Question three, which [int] domain does exist currently? And the
correct answer here is Euro Fish dot [int]. All of the others do not
exist, currently. Question four, of course, the [inaudible] stands
for DNSSEC [inaudible].
And five, how many bits wide is a TLD field of a DNS record?
[Inaudible] Peter, how much?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

Page 139 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Yes.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Perfect, yes, dear Peter, danke. So the answer to this is C, 32. I
always do this when I forgot the answer myself. [LAUGHTER]
This is true, this is true. I know Peter knows it. So number six.
What does SOA stand for? That’s D, start of authority. Seven,
what does the CD bit stand for in a DNS query? It is B, checking
disabled. Number eight, what does KSK stand for? Key signing
key.
If you have this wrong, you can bring your lunch form to me right
now.

Okay, number nine, how many different root server

operators or organizations are there? The correct answer is 12.
It is very signed. It operates A and to J, so that’s why there are
not 13. There are 13 root letters, there are 24 root server
addresses, there are 12 organizations.

So that the correct

answer is A, 12.
And the last question, which country top level domain was
earliest to deploy DNSSEC? And that is, of course, B, Sweden.
The earliest of these four. That’s not a country code, top level
domain.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

Page 140 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

It’s…

RUSS MUNDY:

One of the base rules of the DNSSEC quiz is the quiz giver is
always right.

ROY ARENDS:

Thank you. Okay, so with that, we’re going to… If you can give
the form back to your, to the original owner, you can check that
by the name on the list. So who has…? Let’s start with 15? Who
has 15 points?
Good, because that would be impossible. So who has 14? 13?
Anyone at 13? 12, anyone? 12 points? 11 points? Perfect, we’ve
got a winner here. We’ve got 11 points.
[APPLAUSE]
Well done. And quickly, 10? Perfect. Oh, I see the DNS folks,
yeah. Nine? Eight? Perfect. Seven? I do this to understand the
distribution, right. Seriously, when I first give this quiz, it was
ridiculously complicated. It was, what is the third bit in the DNS
message stands for when the answer is signed? Something like
that.
And no one had those correct. So I made it a little bit more
wider, and I can see that in the distribution of the scoring.

Page 141 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

Thank you everyone for participating. And I hope to see you the
next DNSSEC quiz in Hyderabad.

DAN YORK:

And thank you Roy for doing this.
[APPLAUSE]
And if anyone would like to help Roy with providing questions,
he’s always open to more questions. So if you would like to see
a couple of those get out of the things, he would love to hear
from you. And now, I want to turn it to Julie to give us info about
lunch.

JULIE HEDLUND:

Thanks Dan. Yeah, so lunch, if you don’t have a lunch ticket,
there are still a few of them around here. You will need it. And
there should be an usher, or ushers out there to help you as well,
but there is a map on the back of the ticket. The lunch is two
levels up. It’s in level two, we’re on level zero. It’s in the
[inaudible] room. So if you go up the stairs, you can go up two
flights of stairs, and there is also an elevator just to the right out
of here.

Page 142 of 143

EN

HELSINKI – DNSSEC Workshop

And then the lunch is just sort of at the back, and of the
[inaudible] room. So please go ahead. If you’ve got the ticket,
you may have lunch. Enjoy.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 143 of 143

