HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 08:15 to 09:15 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

OLGA CAVALLI:

Good morning, everyone.
If the gentlemen could be seated.
Good morning, everyone.
My name is Olga Cavalli.

I am the GAC representative of

Argentina, and also the GAC vice chair, and I coordinate two
working groups in the GAC.

One is about protection of

geographic names in new gTLDs, which is what covers us this
morning in this room, and the other one is about participation of
the GAC in the NomCom, which will be presented at this time
Thursday.
Hello to the translators there. I hope I am not too fast. So if I am
too fast, you just wave me.
And also, you will have to have some patience with me today
because I didn't sleep. I have been watching the games, and
Chile won and Argentina lost. So it's a kind of sad day this
morning, but my congratulations to my Chilean friends and

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

brothers from the region. They did a very good job. So I'm kind
of sad and sleepy, but I'm here with you.
And also, we are competing with the Ethos Award I think. So we
will do our best to entertain you this morning.
I will present to you two documents. One is a PowerPoint which
contains what we have been doing in the last -- well, since March
to here. And previous to the March meeting in Morocco, we were
kind of focused in the IANA transition, so we did prepare a
document which is about public interest. We were focused in
that document, but we did not have many phone calls.
We did start with our conference calls after the Marrakech
meeting. So I will let you know what we have been talking
about.
And then at 9:15 we will report the summary what we are going
to talk about now to the GAC plenary.
So if you have any questions during my presentation, please let
me know.
Just a little bit background. To those of you that are new to this
process, this working group was created after what was
mentioned in GAC Durban communique in July 2013.

That

stated that ICANN should work with the GAC to refine the rules
for new gTLD rounds to avoid some conflicts that we had in the

Page 2 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

first round, especially about the use of some country and -some territory names that are relevant for some communities
and some countries in different parts of the world.
We started our work in the Buenos Aires meeting in 2013, and we
have produced some documents. One is a document that was
presented before the Singapore meeting. Then we opened it for
comments as a thing that has never been done before in the
GAC. So we opened the document for comments. Not a final
document produced by GAC, but just a draft background
document.
We received many, many, many comments. We presented the
summary of those comments in the meeting in Singapore in
2014.
After that presentation, we read the transcripts and we decided
that we should focus in some things that were really stressed
during that session, which was what really mean "public
interest" in the context of ICANN and in the context of the use of
these geographic names in new gTLDs. So this is what I mainly
will be presenting this morning.
And also, we developed our first work plan, because the group
was not kind of formally established until then.

Page 3 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And also, we developed a group of best practices that I will
present them to you today. We also reviewed them before, but I
would like to review them again because we received some
comments from our members in the working group.
And then we have some inputs from friends from some countries
about the use of regional names and related concepts like
relevant governments and other things. So it's kind of a lot of
things to review. But can we go to the next one, Julia, please.
So very, very quickly. The objectives of this working group is
have less uncertainty for the next new round of new gTLDs. We
want less conflicts and more success stories. That's the idea.
We want to avoid the misuse of names which are relevant for
communities, regions and countries, have less conflicts, and
also, if we can, give some background information to the GNSO
or to the development process of different documents that are
being done in the ICANN environment. So this is the idea of the
working group.

It's a GAC working group; it's not a cross-

community working group. But we have been very open. We
have opened the documents for comments for the first time in
the GAC story.
Can we go to the next one, please.

Page 4 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

So what I will present to you now is the working plan that we
have been updating very lately. It has been shared with our
colleagues from GAC, so if our GAC colleagues can give us some
feedback, perhaps, in the section that it's about the plenary
presentation, about the working group to the GAC, that could be
great.
Comments about best practices that we received lately. The use
of some regional names and related concepts about relevant
governments. Then I will make a quick revision of the document
about public interest, which is the idea. The idea is to present
this document to ICANN as a GAC contribution, if possible. And if
not, we won't do that. Maybe it's done by some countries, if we
decide so.
It's a document that has reviewed the use of the concept public
interest in different documents that are relevant to ICANN. And
then I won't talk about reactions to straw woman paper
proposed by Cross-Community Working Group on country and
territory names. That will be done by my colleague Gema, from
Spain, tomorrow, but the document that she will present
tomorrow has been prepared by the working group of
geographic names.

Page 5 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And then I want to tell you about a request that we had in the
meeting we had in Marrakech about including other experts in
our working group email list.
Those that you know me, I'm always open -- towards openness,
and -- but there are some rules in the GAC that has to be
followed, and it's not only what I want but what the rules are. So
I will briefly talk about that if I have the time. And if you have
any comments, you will let me know.
So Julia, if you can upload the work plan.
Thank you. This is a work plan that has been changing since we
started with the formal work plan in 2014.
First is with the public comments that we received in 2014, we
prepared the set of best practices that I will review with you.
And we decided to revise the concept of public interest, which I
will present to you today. So this point 1 is more or less quite
developed.
Number 2 is these ideas and these reflections and these
comments that we have or some countries have about this issue.
The idea is to inject them into the different policy development
process in ICANN. We have not done that as GAC, but part of the
documents that we have developed have been -- have been sent

Page 6 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

as comments to different processes from -- as a contribution
from some countries from Latin America. That's point 2.
Can we scroll down a little bit. So I won't go into details. This
document is among the information that GAC colleagues have,
so it's mainly for GAC information.
Can we go to point 3, Julia, please. And this is the link, up there
is the link to the contribution that some countries of Latin
America, we did to one of the requests for comments about the
policy development process of the new gTLD round. And then as
I told you, when we reviewed the transcribes -- transcriptions,
transcribes of the Singapore meeting, many delegates and many
members of the community request if we could think about and
reflect about the use of public interest and public good. So this
is what we will do today. And we have some suggestions by EBU
also.
Can we scroll?
So this point 3 is already quite developed.
Also, we have a proposal to analyze the situation of some
annexed and occupied territory names. This is a suggested
action by Ukraine and by Georgia. We have talked about that.
We may bring this up today again. So this is half -- halfly made.

Page 7 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And number 5 is, this is -- we would like to collect experiences to
learn from previous rounds.

We haven't done that as a

compilation. We have information about that, but we have not
compiled it. And the best practices, which is number 6, is
already developed; of course, always ready for improvement.
And then number 7 is we talked about developing a geo names
list. We talked many times about that. At the moment, we
concluded that it was difficult to prepare. It was difficult to
maintain. So we, for moment, we kept it aside. But during the
Dublin meeting, we had a meeting with people from UNESCO
and from ISO, so this was an idea of our colleague Giacomo
Mazzone from EBU. So this may be something we explore in the
future. So number 7 is one of our action items still to be
developed.
And what is it? I think it's done. Can we scroll down?
The rest is just organization things.
So I will go to the PowerPoint now. Julia, please.
Any comments? Any questions so far?
Kavouss.

IRAN:

Page 8 of 37

Thank you very much. Good morning to everybody.

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

I have few comments. The first comment, let us, to the extent
practicable, maintain GAC meetings nonpolitical. So discussing
some term of the territories under occupation is a very complex
issue. It may take a lot of our times, and we may have some
difficulty to have any comments, because views may be
different.
So quickly, to the extent possible, take out any political
orientations of this document.
Second, I have a question that what is regional names? We don't
have regionals names. Are we talking of region one, region two,
region three, or Asia or Oceania, Latin America? We are talking
of geographic names but not regional names. So I think we have
to be very careful about that.
And the third issue, I also suggest, having participated almost
actively in 19 months or 18 months of the CCWG, it is better not
to talk about public interest. You could refer to that in the
inverted comma, guillemets in French, but trying to say what is
public interest, we didn't have any success to say what is public
interest.
Public interest is referred to in the article of incorporation. It is
there as it is. We don't touch it. It is copied in the new bylaw.
That's that.

Page 9 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

But my fear is that we may get into the piege, into the trap, to
see public interest. In view of some people, this would be public
interest, the other would not be public interest.

So try to

streamline the discussions under your leadership to the area
which were very sensitive and arise from Durban meeting, and
remember what was the reasons for that.
So this is my request to you and to the distinguished colleagues;
to concentrate on something that we could do.
Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Kavouss.
Any reactions to that?
(Saying name). Sorry; Mzia. Sorry, sorry, sorry.

GEORGIA:

Mzia. thank you, Olga. I just want to make a short comment.
I don't think that this is a political issue because we concern
term "relevant." I think that this term, in case of self-declared
countries, is not unclear. I think to define this term more clearly,
we avoid -- we will avoid political issue. So that's why Ukraine
and me propose to define this term.

Page 10 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

OLGA CAVALLI:

EN

Thank you, Mzia. Other comments, other reactions.
Okay. Thank you, Kavouss, very much for your comments. I
would tend to disagree with you about regional names. There
are regions that have names in some countries that comprise
two or three countries. So this is something that I think it's
worth to explore. So we have -- we have different opinions
about that.
And the public interest revision was -- was requested during the
Singapore meeting. It was specially requested by the United
States delegate at that meeting, that we should work on trying -I know it's extremely difficult, but we should try to at least think
about different perspectives of the use of best practices. And I
think this is the purpose of the document that we -- that we have
done in the working group that has been shared with the GAC
colleagues. So this is the idea. Any other comments? Yes,
Milagros.

PERU:

I tend to agree with Olga regarding the regions, Kavouss.
Because for example, only in South America, the Mesonean
(phonetic) region, it's both a geographic reference and a region.
The Andean region is also a geographic reference. On the other

Page 11 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

hand, in reference to the public interest issue in the meeting in
Marrakech regarding public interest and I participated in, I was
told by a lawyer of GAC -- of ICANN that the public interest for
ICANN was defined as recorded in the California law. In fact, the
wording, the phrase "public interest," was used when the
organization was being structured because it had to be done
under the California law. So we cannot avoid using that phrase,
and perhaps redefining it is also an absurd because it is already
defined by the California law. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Milagros. Any other comments? I have a comment
from Oleksandr from Ukraine and he is participating remotely. I
will read it to you. "About relevant, other GAC members can, of
course, bring new ideas, so it's welcome, but we definitely
cannot keep current term unchanged." We haven't come to this
point so far.

Okay.

"There's a discussion about relevant

government and internationally accepted government.

So

Oleksandr is making this comment about that. Bring new ideas
is still welcome, but we definitely cannot keep current term
unchanged, otherwise we will need to set a very clear definition.
So we have to change the term or set the definition of the
current. I like both ways but I have very strong concerns about
keep it as it is now. It is inappropriate because the position of
some GAC members committee will never find consensus in any

Page 12 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

country territory issue. So I suggest two actions. Request more
ideas on terms and definitions of relevant government. Request
legal oversight from ICANN lawyers on this term." I would also -I think it stops there, right? I would also propose to get some
advice from United Nations experts regarding this issue. Thank
you, Oleksandr. This is very similar to what I've been thinking
about this issue of defining relevant governments. We will go to
that term in a minute.

Any other comments about this

definition? And I would like to remind you that ICANN is also -has opened a space to reflect about the meaning of public
interest. There was a wiki and there was a meeting and there
was a session in the last meeting in Marrakech. Unfortunately I
couldn't attend because it collapsed with other meetings we
had in the GAC. But I think at least it's a good idea to talk about
it and review it from different perspectives and see how it fits
from different environments.

Any other comments?

Okay.

Thank you.
So we will go to the PowerPoint, if you allow me. Julia, can we
go to the next one? So this is the best practices that we have
developed after receiving the comments in Singapore and
analyzing them. I won't go through them because we have
presented them before.

We have comments from some

members in the working group that this best practices ideally
should concile interests of applicants in having legal certainty,

Page 13 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

which is something we care about. And a clear environment and
also should concile interests of governments and public
authorities and communities. This is the purpose of this working
group, to know uncertainties and to have less conflicts in the
next round of new gTLDs.
I will share with you this PowerPoint so I won't go through all the
best practices. In generally what we would like to see is early
conduct between the applicant and the -- the relevant -- I don't
know if authorities or government or whoever it is from the
community, the region or subregion or whatever the name is
used. So it is not a surprise once the name is used in a new
gTLDs and then it's a problem and it's a conflict. So if you have
an early contact, which is by the way, it is established in the first
version of the Applicant Guidebook.

The thing is that for

different reasons it didn't work so well in the first round. So we
think that in the second it could be somehow established in a
different way. So it's more -- I won't say mandatory but it's more
-- so the applicant is more keen in get in touch with the relevant
region or the relevant community where the -- where this name
belongs.

So I will keep it for you to review in the Word

PowerPoint. Any comments about that? About this slide? This
was presented before several times so I won't take a lot of time
about this. Okay. I see none. Julia, can we go to the next one,
please?

Page 14 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

Okay. This is -- this is a proposed idea of revising this use of
annexed or occupied territories and also review the term
"relevant

government"

or

"government

internationally

recognized." This is a discussion we had -- not a discussion, a
debate we had in some of our conference calls, so I would very
much welcome comments from you. And I think Oleksandr did a
very, very good suggestion that we could have legal advice from
ICANN and also legal advice from some United Nations or
internationally law expert. I'm looking at Milagros. She's an
expert in international law. I am not. I'm an engineer, so I'm not
the one to make this but I'm just helping the work. Because in
some documents we found that the use of the term of "relevant
governments" and then some others in the working group
pointed out that "governments internationally recognized" was
the right term to be used. So if someone in the audience could
have any -- any other comment or any other idea, and if not, we
will try to find more advice about this definition. Any comments.
Jorge.

SWITZERLAND:

Hello. Good morning, Olga, and sorry for being late. On this
issue, although I'm -- I'm not an expert at all, it came to me that
in the end we are talking about what ICANN would be
interpreting when -- when this concept of relevant government
or whatever concept we use is being implemented --

Page 15 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

implemented or being useful for any application. And we have
to be mindful that ICANN is bound to international law
according to its articles of incorporation and the bylaws. So
perhaps there's already a link there. And we don't have to
reinvent the wheel for the purposes of this working group.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Kavouss.

IRAN:

Thank you, Olga. I think I should explain that I should not have
misunderstood. I had no problem with those names which are
associated with multiple countries in particular region.

We

know the example. But I wanted to avoid to have political
problems. This is very important. We do not convert the GAC to
the security council of the United Nations. Nor your committee,
your group.
Number two, I almost tend to agree with Jorge that I don't think
that the GAC -- sorry, ICANN legal team could intervene in the
sovereign right of countries, talking about this is the right
approach or this is not the right approach. This is sovereignty of
the countries. Nor a particular legal entity or also in a general
(indiscernible) could have. It could have its own firm, law firm,
or whatever it has. But I don't think that we should have

Page 16 of 37

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

reference. Some internationally agreed entities may be not an
issue but not particularly at this legal advisers.

They are

advisers to those people they are advising. They're not legal
advisers to sovereign governments. So I don't think that we
could recourse to those sorts of the thing and then put as a
stamp that okay, this is approved by legal adviser X or legal
adviser Y or by legal office in particular countries. Madam, world
is quite strange and people have certain interests.

These

interests should not intervene or interfere with the national
sovereignty of the countries. So to the extent possible once
again I use this term, we should avoid this sort of advice from
these peoples. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Kavouss. Can I ask you a clarifying question? The
question came in analyzing several documents where the term
"relevant government" is used and it was suggested by other
members of the working group that instead of relevant
governments

we

should

use

the

term

"government

internationally recognized." In my modest opinion this is not
interfering with any sovereignty rights. We just are reviewing
different ways of defining. So this is why we have been talking
about this.

Page 17 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

IRAN:

EN

Madam, I'm not referring to that. I'm referring to the legal
adviser of the ICANN providing information about something
and so on and so forth. That was my question. I'm not talking
that. I fully agree internationally recognized countries and so on
and so forth. That is the alphabet of our work. But I refer to
something else for a particular subject asking legal adviser of
ICANN to comment. That was my question. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Kavouss. I will open a queue. Have I Yuliya, I have -- I
think you were first, and Milagros, I'm sorry I cannot see you very
well. You are? Miguel. Oh my God. Yes. I cannot see you from
here. And Milagros. So Yuliya first, please.

RUSSIA:

Good morning, everyone. Actually I can agree with Kavouss
regarding that. We should not make our discussion political
because we are actually -- we are doing very important work. Of
course, we have to work on geographical names which is
relevant to the territory we are actually recognized as the GAC
members. When it comes to the very terms of international law,
of course, we don't have a mandate and we don't have enough
competence to do that. And so we are coming to U.N. language
and how can we say that it's relevant U.N. language or irrelevant
right now because as I said, we don't have mandate, we don't

Page 18 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

have competence for that. If some wording is proposed, I need
to go to my minister of foreign affairs to check whether it's right
U.N. language or not. And I, for example, do not have enough
competence to say right now that this is acceptable or not. So
we are coming to the territory we do not have mandated, first of
all.
So when I say I -- I'm just making my own judgment on where it's
better to have relevant governments or internationally
recognized governments because when we discuss regional
territory name, for example, it's the "C" name, the number of
countries actually have the access to the "C" and other country
used to have historical, for example, access to the "C." All of
them internationally recognized who's relevant? What is the -actually the way out of this situation? It's really very delicate
issue. And so first we do not need to -- should be very delicate
with political issues. We need to avoid this because we are in a
technical territory and we have to -- we are thinking about
Internet, not about the how to solve the political things. And
U.N. language should be considered in U.N. This is the point.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Julia. I have a queue that's Miguel, please. Go
ahead.

Page 19 of 37

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

MEXICO:

Thank you, Madam Chair. Good morning, everybody.
I fully agree with the previous speakers in terms that -- about
mixing this with political issues.
When this conversation gets into the working group, I asked to
my

foreign

affairs

about

this

change

from

"relevant

government" to "government internationally recognized." And
what they say is we cannot accept "government internationally
recognized" because when you are recognizing someone, it's a
political issue. So we must try to avoid that.
I totally agree perhaps "relevant" is not the perfect term. We can
work on that.

But definitely "government internationally

recognized" is not a term good for us. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Miguel.
I have Milagros.

PERU:

I agree with Kavouss and with Yuliya regarding the need to keep
aside all political debates. I don't think this is the right fora for
that. And to that, I have to add that "government internationally
recognized" is wrong because there are, as far as I know, two
different practices around the world of government recognition.

Page 20 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And we would again be dealing with political ideas in order to
reach those practices.
And "relevant government" is also wrong because, you see, the
word "relevant" is used over and over again in the bylaws and
the articles of incorporation. And who defines what is relevant
and what is not?
A government is a government. It's not relevant or irrelevant.
That's it. So the word "relevant" should be avoided.
So I would say governments and make a space -- simply
governments and making a space to analyze eventually case-bycase situations, no?

Because we are thinking here of

hypothetical scenarios. There are very few really. In practice,
how many scenarios can be presented to this ICANN regarding
the situation of governments that are questioned or geographic
areas that are questioned? How many scenarios? There are very
few in the world. And perhaps they never arrive as a case to
ICANN.
So I would say simply "governments" and leave open the door to
analyze a case-by-case situation if the need should arise, no?
Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Page 21 of 37

Thank you, Milagros.

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And I have -- oh, the queue is long. Olof and Mzia, Mzia. Mzia
and Olof. And then sorry, Olof, Mzia, and Indonesia. And who
else? I don't know your name, I'm sorry. Okay. And Finn. Okay.
Mzia, please.

GEORGIA:

Thank you. I don't understand why some members of GAC see in
our request to define -- redefine the term "relevant government"
a political issue. This is not a political issue.
ICANN is not a political organization, and it should not intervene
into (indiscernible) of countries. But ICANN is the organization
who grants domain names. If -- how ICANN can't grant domain - I mean, geographical name of self-declared countries or
conflict territories, if term "relevant" will not be -- is not clearly
defined. We just want to avoid this problem and just to clear
what is it relevant.
I agree that maybe "internationally recognized" is not proper
term, but I agree with Miguel and Oleksandr that we should work
on it to define this term "relevant." We should involve ICANN
lawyers and U.N. lawyers. Maybe we will keep this term in the
applicant guidebook, but we have to -- we have to clearly define
so we can give it definition, clear definition, what is relevant.

Page 22 of 37

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

I don't agree to leave only term "government" because I think
this is more unclear than "relevant government."
So I just would like to stress that it is not a political issue, no. It's
-- it's trying to avoid political disputes.

And I agree with

Oleksandr and with Miguel to involve -- to work on it further and
to make clear the definition of its term to avoid any
misunderstandings later.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Mzia.
Olof?

OLOF NORDLING:

Thank you. Olof Nordling, ICANN staff and not speaking on my
own behalf but trying to channel Oleksandr Tsaruk from
Ukraine. Two comments.
First one, and I quote, for regions issue, we need to work on lists
like ISO 3166-2 as basic lists regarding protections of geo names,
end quote.
Second comment a few minutes later, a comment: We go from
politics with capital P to definitions with capital D and oversight
with capital O, end quote. Thank you.

Page 23 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

OLGA CAVALLI:

EN

Thank you, Olof.
Next I have -- and I will close the queue now because then we
won't have time to finish. Indonesia.

INDONESIA:

Thank you, Olga. I just want to -- I'm trying to find out, but I
couldn't find. Olof could help me and also you. In the ICANN,
does ISO organization also sit as an observer or whatever
because as far as I'm aware, if you look at the RFC set up by IETF,
I have never heard about any comments from the ISO group.
That's number one.
So I think we are talking about this. Then we have to see the
possibility of ISO to be, what you call it, to be accommodated or
sitting here somewhere in the ICANN group where they can
exchange information about how important is ID for Indonesia
or whatever, MY for Malaysia and so on, how important it is.
Perhaps they don't even know how important it is. Of course,
some of them, of course, know about that.
Secondly, perhaps it is also time for us to talk with ISO, that the
changes in political or geo names based on political or other
issues. It's sometimes kind of fast, and it has to be somehow
adopted and recognized in the ICANN numbers, ICANN DNS.

Page 24 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

Now, if you look at the ISO process, it will take a long time to
change something because they have to make a TC, a technical
committee, and so on and so on and so on. It has to be agreed in
a local meeting and regional meeting and then big meeting and
so on and so on. So it takes a lot of time. It is different with RFC
because RFC more honest and open standard.

I mean,

everybody around the world can just give their opinion. And if it
is important, they will fix it. And IANA will adopt it. And the
protocol is there.
But an ISO, it is not the case. Perhaps it is timely for us to talk
with ISO.
I have also problem in Indonesia with our national standard
decision agency because they adopt the ISO and IEC, the
International Electrotechnical Commission process.

And it

always take a long time. And when we discuss with them about
Internet standard, it doesn't -- no, no, it is difficult to get
matched, if I can say that appropriately. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thanks to. Before I will continue with the queue, just to let you
know we did an informal contact in Dublin with representatives
of ISO. And they explained to us that process that you just
described. And it takes some time. But we are thinking about
that, of course, as an option.

Page 25 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

Next in the queue -- oh, I lost my queue. I have -- I think I have -you and I have Denmark.
Please, go ahead. I don't know your name. I'm so sorry. If you
can let us know your name, that would be great.

NIGERIA:

My name is Sonigitu Ekpe, and I'm Cross River State
government, Nigeria. It is a national government. We are all
aware that today that the Internet of Things could lead to global
governance. We can't pretend about it. That is the possibility
that will come. So it's a better time to start the dialogue now
and see how we can emerge the political dimension of the
Internet because if we were not talking about Internet
governance, which is already political at some level, then ICANN
which is the main holder of the domain name cannot protect
governments.
So I see that "relevant governments" should not be there but
"government" because you have local governments, you have
subnational, and you have national governments. And most
time these governments have their various interests even within
a system. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Page 26 of 37

Thanks to you.

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

Finn?

DENMARK:

Thank you, Olga. It was only a point of order. When Yuliya from
Russia spoke, the transcript indicated Denmark. So in order that
the transcript is correct, please indicate that it was Russia who
spoke.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Finn.

It's Yuliya from Russia, not Julia from

Denmark. By the way, is at home with a very beautiful baby.
She's okay, right?

DENMARK:

I have been told she is okay.

OLGA CAVALLI:

That's good to know. Thank you for your clarification, Finn.
Okay. I don't see any more requests for the floor. Kavouss, the
last in the queue.

IRAN:

Yes, thank you. Just a small question to you and to colleagues.
Imagine that in some area of the world an island is called X by
country A and the same island is called Y by country B. What is

Page 27 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

our role in those two -- within those two countries? Many, many
people are far, far, far from those to have any idea, any
knowledge, any background and any intervention from legal
point. What is our role in that? I'm talking of far, far -- no name.
People may know that. But an island, it's called two different
names by two different countries, big countries. What is our role
there? We say country A is right or country B is right? Can we say
that? Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Well, about -- some examples about that, there are some United
Nations' resolutions that should be stated when referring to
some of these names, so -- but that's not the focus of our
working group.
So I will stop this discussion here, and I think it's extremely
interesting. And I don't know if we reach an agreement, but I
think we had a good exchange of reflections and comments. So
it's

"relevant

government,"

it's

"government,"

or

it's

"internationally recognized."
Let's keep on working in the working group about this, and we
may -- we may bring this to -- I will summarize all the comments
in a document for the working group, working on my notes and
the transcript -- with the transcript. So I will share with you and

Page 28 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

the working group and we may organize a call, maybe in July,
and see how we move forward.
Can we go to the next slide?
And I don't know if I will have time. I just want to show you very
briefly the contents of the document that we have prepared,
some of us in the working group. The idea would be the GAC has
already it among the documents for -- for this meeting. If the
GAC agrees, this document could be a document sent to the
group of people that are gathering information about public
interest concept in ICANN or not. It's something up to the GAC to
decide.
For me that drafted the first version, the document was quite
interesting.
What we used as a source of information were the ICANN
strategic plan for fiscal years 2016 to 2020, the high-level
meeting of the General Assembly of the World Summit of
Information Society, and one of the workshops of the Internet
Governance Forum about public interest that happened in Joao
Pessoa. I was invited to be a panelist in it.
So we used these documents and we gathered some definitions
and some concepts about public interest that we thought it
could be interesting for the working group in general.

Page 29 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

Can we go to the next one, please, Julia?
One clarification.
The documents about ICANN and the mission and all that
information has been used before any changes that will be done
now, so we should perhaps review the paper that was prepared
like two months ago in the light of the new bylaws.
So, "ICANN defines the global public interest in relation to the
Internet as ensuring the Internet becomes and continues to be
stable, inclusive, and accessible across the globe. All may enjoy
the benefits of a single and open Internet. In addressing its
public responsibility, ICANN must build trust in the Internet and
its governance ecosystem. This vision is central to ICANN's
public responsibility framework; however, there is a need to
define particular areas of focus and target topics, regions, and
stakeholders that need to be addressed in relation to ICANN's
responsibility to serve the global public interest."
So we have a specific reference about public interest that has to
be reviewed in a certain context, which is something important.
So public interest would not mean the same when we are
referring to different things, so this is the first reference that we
found.
Can we go to the next one, please.

Page 30 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

Of course the document is quite long. This is just a summary.
I don't know if I will have time to go through it.
"ICANN's vision's reference to public interest.
"ICANN's vision is that of an independent, global organization
trusted worldwide to coordinate the global Internet's systems of
unique identifiers to support a single, open globally
interoperable Internet. ICANN builds trust through serving the
public interest"-- again -- "incorporating the transparent and
effective cooperation among stakeholders worldwide to
facilitate its coordination role."
So this -- this inclusion of the public interest here in this
paragraph, we see it as building trust. It's not only as a very
narrow mission. It is more. It is broader.
Can we go to the next one, please.
In the strategic objectives, I will go just to the last one: "Develop
and implement a global public interest framework bounded by
ICANN's mission.
And, "There is a specific reference about ICANN coordinating
policy development reasonably and appropriately related to
these technical functions."

Page 31 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

So it is not so, so narrow.

EN

It has to be reasonable and

appropriately.
So this is all -- all from ICANN documents.
The next one, please.
Strategic objectives.
"The evolution of the domain name marketplace should not
create conflicting agendas of key players thwart cooperation
and evolution of marketplace to serve the public interest.
Promote the role, clarity, and establish mechanisms to increase
trust within the ecosystem rooted in the public interest. ICANN
seeks to develop a public responsibility framework for
promoting the global public interest in the coordination of the
Internet's unique identifier systems and in furtherance of
ICANN's mission.

The framework will clarify ICANN's roles,

objectives and milestones in promoting the public interest
through capacity building, and increasing the base of
internationally diverse, knowledgeable, and engaged ICANN
stakeholders."
So as you can see -Oh, many people is coming to -- to the room. That's great.

Page 32 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

As you can see, what we found when we analyzed this -- this
several times, that the public interest concept is included in the
ICANN fundamental documents, is that it really is broader than
the concept of a narrow mission. It goes beyond that. And
somehow we found this context somehow aligned with what we
are trying to do with the working group, in trying to lower
uncertainties and preparing a more predictable environment for
these policies.
Can we go to the next one, please.
Other parts of the ICANN strategic objectives.
How much time we have?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

OLGA CAVALLI:

Four minutes? I thought -- it's not until 9:30?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

OLGA CAVALLI:

It's not the same people?

Page 33 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

OLGA CAVALLI:

Oh, this is strange. Okay. Two minutes.

EN

So I won't go through the strategic objectives. You have this in
the document. You have this in the slides.
What we found in analyzing this is that the term "public interest"
is used in a much broader way than what we thought at the
beginning, so we found it very interesting to review.
Can we go to the next one.
Julia? Next.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

OLGA CAVALLI:

So as I said --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

Page 34 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

OLGA CAVALLI:

To the GAC?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

OLGA CAVALLI:

Okay. Thank you, Olof. Thank you very much. So as you can
see, these references to public interest go beyond what strictly
the mission is. It's more. It goes beyond that. And we think it's
important to the purpose of our working group and this was
requested a while ago that we should review it. This is why we
prepared this document.
So the document is among the materials for the GAC to review,
and I would welcome comments from our GAC colleagues about
the possibility of sending it as a GAC contribution to the public
interest work that ICANN is doing, and if not, just say no and we
will see what to do.
The next one, please.
Other sources that we used is the high-level meeting that
reviewed the WSIS outcomes and, as I had mentioned, a public
interest workshop in the last IGF in Joao Pessoa in Brazil.
Hi, Alice.
Next one, please.

Page 35 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And I think we are almost done.
Also would like to stress a contribution by Peru about the
difference in between common good and public interest. Thank
you, Milagros. That was very enlightening. It's part of the
document. It's included in the long document. I won't go
through details, but you can review it there.
And can we go to the next one, please, Julia.
So it is difficult to define but we will still work on it, the same
that we will do with the definition of "relevant government" and
"internationally" -- I don't know, I almost forget all the
definitions. We will work on that in the working group, and there
will be -Can we go to the next one, Julia, please.
We will continue with the working plan, with the public interest
document.
There will be, tomorrow, a presentation about reactions to a
document prepared by the cross-community working group on
country and territory names. This was prepared by the working
group and will be presented by our colleagues who came up
from Spain, but it was -- it's an outcome of the working group.
Of course Gema has been fundamental to preparing that
document.

Page 36 of 37

HELSINKI – GAC Protection of Geographic Names Working Group Meeting

EN

And we had a question in Marrakech if we could include experts
outside the GAC in the working list -- email working list of our
working group. What we have been discussing in the GAC is that
the best is that we invite these experts to our meetings or maybe
we can invite them to certain calls or certain parts of the calls,
but not open in the working list of our working groups. So this is
the comment that I wanted to say.
I think this is the last -- Julia, this is the last -Okay. This is the last slide.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 37 of 37

