HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57
Thursday, June 30, 2016 - 17:00 to 18:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

ROB HOGGARTH:

Good afternoon, everyone. We're getting started now. Thank
you.
[ Applause ]
Thank you. That's the first time ever -- thank you.
[ Cheers and Applause ]
See, they're applauding already. This is the first time I've ever
started an ICANN meeting with applause. So thank you very
much.
Good afternoon, everyone.

I'm Rob Hoggarth.

I'm senior

director of policy and community engagement here at ICANN.
Tanzanica King, our senior manager of meeting strategy and
design, invited me to join her up here this afternoon. Let's give
her a hand.
[ Applause ]
The purpose for this final session of the first full work week of
the ICANN public forum on policy or the ICANN 56 policy forum is
essentially an opportunity for us all to reflect a little bit. I did
some of the microphone work earlier in the week and saw a
Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

couple of tired faces. I'm delighted to see today many bright,
happy looking faces, satisfied folks, people who are looking
forward to the next stage of work. But this is really a milestone
for all of us, to sit back and reflect a little bit, and look forward to
what we're going to do next with respect to this policy forum.
The next policy forum will be a year from now in Johannesburg.
But there are things that you've all learned this week, and we'd
like to capture what those learnings are. We'd like to learn from
you what works and what didn't work, what you all want to
keep, what you all want to get rid of.

This is really an

opportunity for about the next 90 minutes to just basically hear
from all of you and to get a really good perspective on what our
next steps will be. And we'd also like you to think a little bit too
about certain aspects of this meeting that may be populated
into the other meetings of the ICANN yearly cycle. What worked
during this meeting that might apply to the meeting in
Hyderabad or the next meeting in Copenhagen. So these are
other things we'd like to probe and really get some useful
participation from you. So Tanzanica, I'll turn the microphone
over to you and we'll get started. Thanks.

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you, Rob. The first thing we want to do really is say thank
you to all of the SO and AC folks that joined us to help produce

Page 2 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

the schedule. That was something different that we did for this
meeting.

It was really, really helpful, to help us produce

something that we knew was the schedule you wanted to have
for this meeting. So thank you for that. We have a list of specific
people, if we move forward on the slide, specific people that
worked with us so we could get all of the feedback, and
hopefully it turned into a schedule that met all of your needs.
If we can go forward to the next slide. What was different about
this meeting? So most of us know in general, but we had six
days in Marrakech, 2,273 attendees in Marrakech with 350
sessions. We had our typical welcome ceremony, public forums,
high interest topics. But in Helsinki, Rob will tell you --

ROB HOGGARTH:

Well, we shifted to the four-day scenario. Although a number of
you were here for a week, but with the plan on four days of work.
And many fewer sessions, as you can see. Down to 199. That
has evoked some thoughts, and I had David Olive on a number
of occasions come up and share the perspective that many of
you have shared with him on that. But it's not because other
meetings didn't focus on community work or policy work, but
this was much more of a focus on a number of those working
policy development issues that really weren't addressed in as
deep a level as the time permits at previous meetings. So not

Page 3 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

only is it a matter of looking at attendees and number of
sessions, but it's really looking at the type of session and the
quality of the session. And that's something we also want to
tease out of you in terms of your perspectives. Was it really
useful from a substance standpoint. Not just a style perspective,
not just the layout of the room, which is also important, but
some of the deeper value that you got out of the experience.
We had arranged this little hand-off between slides, so I hope it's
working effectively. As I mentioned earlier, David would come to
me at different times during the week and say, "This Is really
going well." "That we need to change." "This we need to fix." A
number of you came up to me as well and shared your
perspectives. We got a number of different quotes, we called it
the rumor mill, and we just threw up a few. But they were just
examples. Many of you found good, positive aspects of the
meeting. Some of you had constructive feedback in terms of
others. In your case you had a favorite quote.

TANZANICA KING:

This is my favorite. "Best meeting B ever."
[ Laughter ]
And if we go to the next slide, so what we're going to do is we
focused on six areas of interest where we want your feedback.

Page 4 of 70

EN

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

We want to know how you felt about the schedule, the amount
of time we had dedicated to focused policy work, crosscommunity sessions, which we did in the afternoons, board
interaction. How did you feel about the fact that the board had
a limited schedule in terms of being off on their own and was out
there to actually interact with everybody?

Outreach and

engagement and networking opportunities. So these are the six
areas, and the reason we chose these six areas is because they
really fit in with the new meeting strategy and what the design
was for. So these were the things we were supposed to focus on,
and how did we do.
If you go to the next slide, Josh is actually going to tell you how
this is going to work so we can do this in the room.

JOSH BAULCH:

All right. So what we're going to do is this is going to require a
little bit of action from you guys. If you'll go to either your
mobile app and if you have it downloaded you can click on the
feedback button and there is a live poll there. Or if you are just
on your computer you can go to meetingapp.icann.org. So
that's meetingapp.icann.org. Once you get to the mobile app,
you'll be able to click on the feedback button. The feedback
button is kind of at the bottom of the page, so if you scroll down,

Page 5 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

you'll see the icon there. And we're going to click on ICANN 56
wrap-up live poll.
There will be six questions there that we'd like everybody to go
through and answer. Once you hit the submit button, we'll be
able to show the results up here on screen.

TANZANICA KING:

I'm looking around the room to see if everybody still needs a
second to get there. Give you all a second. I see a couple of
head nods. Yes, give me a second.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Well, I think it's important to note here that we're looking for
your impressions. You'll see these are very general questions.
The hope is as we approach each section you'll be able to share
with the rest of the community some specifics about each
particular area.

And we really sincerely want to get that

feedback. This feedback is going to go to your colleagues, the
next set of planners, it's going to go to Nick and his team.
Tanzanica is going to incorporate it into the planning for the
next meeting. So it's very important -- you know, enjoy the fun
technology. We've discussed how we might use it in the future,
potentially to use it as a future metric maybe, just to say, all
right, the first meeting was 4.7. The next one was 5.4. We don't

Page 6 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

know how that will work. We just appreciate everybody willing
to play around with a couple of buttons and give us some
feedback. I think we're ready.

TANZANICA KING:

Think we're ready? If you can go to the next slide. So our first
question is, "How satisfied were you with the format of the
schedule?" So we want to think about the fact that we did -- all
the policy work was sort of stuck in the mornings. People met
amongst themselves, were really in their rooms doing policy
work. The afternoons we had cross-community sessions. Please
submit your answers. Fantastic. It's working well.

ROB HOGGARTH:

What I'd like to, if I can observe, is as we've done through the
rest of the week, we have microphones throughout the room. I'd
like our colleagues who have microphones to please identify
themselves. I see one of four. I see three of four. Is there
somebody over on this end? This -- this should work. So please,
if you have a comment, please raise your hand, and then we'll go
through the numbers to do that. Tanzanica, this is your session,
so this -- this segment, so please go ahead.

TANZANICA KING:

Page 7 of 70

I see Chris with his hand up.

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

EN

Hi, thanks, everybody. It's Chris Disspain. I'm sorry, can you just
-- I'm just a little confused. Why has each question got the same
answer twice?

ROB HOGGARTH:

What we're doing, it's a scale, from 1-10.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

Yeah, but there's two "not at alls," two "needs" --

ROB HOGGARTH:

Correct.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

I get you, so if I think it needs improvement I can mark it a 3 or 4.
If I think it's good but needs improvement then it's a 4.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Correct.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

Okay. Now I understand. Thank you so much.

Page 8 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

ROB HOGGARTH:

No bets on the results. Thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

TANZANICA KING:

It's meetingapp.icann.org.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Go ahead, Edmon.

EDMON CHUNG:

Edmon Chung here. So I just have a couple of comments on the
schedule itself as it was posted online. I guess I'm old school,
but I like the old version much more than the sched because it
requires me to have a sched account to get the Outlook, you
know, session -- like to sync with my Outlook or I have to get the
whole thing down. So I -- I think it's -- it's -- what we had before
was actually easier to read and figure out where the sessions
are. Especially the grid part. The grid part on sched.com doesn't
-- doesn't show up very well because it's so dynamic. So just -just on that particular -- particular point. I don't know what --

Page 9 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

what other people thought, but just I guess this is -- I have other
comments for other parts, so I'll wait for then to -- but the
format of the schedule I think generally, to have some -- some of
the sessions that are dedicated so everyone can be in the same
place, I think that part is -- is a good idea.

TANZANICA KING:

So we'll go to Marilyn.

MARILYN CADE:

Thank you. My name is Marilyn Cade. I'm going to make three
short comments, and then I have comments for later on other
issues.

I agree with what Edmon said, but I also want to

comment on what was a major barrier for me in the use of the
schedule -- in the use of this agenda because events and -- that
are related to work that is taking place in many cases were not
on the program. And I will mention, for instance, the DNS
women's event. A few other things that may have been closed
meetings, but in the past they've always been on the schedule
so that people could find them. And I really want to point that
out as a major problem because even though the major -- even
though the priority of work is policy, many of us use these
meetings to organize side meetings, side gathering, work on
other things. And since we're at the venue, I urge that you be a
little more flexible. That's enough on that point.

Page 10 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

I think also, while I'm generally satisfied with the new policy
format, and there may be a better place for me to say this, but in
a deep dive on work on policy this particular room setup is not
satisfactory. And that means that venue choices -- I'm not going
to look Nick in the eye because I'm going to be giving him more
work to do, but the venue choices for the policy session, even
though it may be fewer in attendance, room setup is going to be
incredibly important. It's very difficult for people to do deep
dive policy work in classroom style or in theater style. So this
room, for instance, had it been set up this way would have been
long but narrower and an open U, even if not everybody can
eyeball each other, is much more conducive. Large groups of
people, difficult to do. But I think really important to do.
So good on the policy format, but I would only give it a 3 on the
venue's ability to really be flexible enough to support it.
And then my final comment that's relevant just to this is, we had
so much work to do that myself and many other people that I've
spoken to expressed some sense still of too much conflict in
terms of not enough time. We proposed four days. I am going to
think that we really need to carefully assess whether it's five
days or four days. Otherwise, I'm giving good rates -- ratings.

TANZANICA KING:

Page 11 of 70

Okay. Looks like we're going to number 2.

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Thank you, Alan Greenberg. The format itself was -- is I think
moderately good. Some of the rules associated with the format,
such as only one afternoon session at a time where in this case
most of them were GNSO-related, just excludes a huge number
of people who I suppose could tour Helsinki and that was rather
nice or just sit by the water. But that's not the intent of the
meeting. So I think we need a lot more flexibility to recognize
that not everyone has the same interest at the same time.
The original schedule also allowed for -- it classed the last day as
inter AC/SO meetings, which is not the same as crosscommunity. It allowed for bilaterals. And this time we had to
squeeze those bilaterals into lunchtimes and other awkward
times. So the overall format is not necessarily bad. How we
implemented it a problem.
And regarding the physical schedule, what Edmon said. The
smiling faces or, in most cases, empty circles take up a lot of real
estate and I don't think add anything at all. Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Page 12 of 70

We'll go over to Number 3 and then to 4.

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

EN

Good afternoon. My name is Sebastien Bachollet, and I will
speak in English [sic]. Comment from my colleagues are really
interesting because, as Marilyn Cade said, the idea of this
meeting was to have three days for working sessions and one
day for outreach. The meeting with the global community and
Internet individual users, with companies, with governments, et
cetera, that is outreach.
Now, due to certain reasons related to the Helsinki city and due
to the period in which we are holding the meeting because we
are on holidays in this city, it seems that the time was not
enough to work together.
I heard many comments before taking the floor, and I believe
that we need to take a view, a position in which we can make a
difference between A, B, and C meetings.
When we're asked whether the format is good, I would say, yes,
it is.

It's good to have afternoon sessions in which the

community participates, but I think we have to move forward.
That is, on the table, we should have representatives from the
different communities. And I believe it is interesting to have
these sessions in the GAC room because there are many
governments staying and participating.
because we can exchange ideas with them.

Page 13 of 70

And this is good

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

And this was not the case before. I don't know if this was made
on purpose. But if this is not made on purpose, I believe this is a
very good result, a very positive result, and that we should take
this into account for the future. Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Number 4.

AVRI DORIA:

Hi. This is Avri Doria. I wanted to make two quick comments.
One, I think it was okay and certainly something that one could
acclimate to and make work. And, two, I don't think you should
take any meaning by not having anybody say "not at all"
because if they really, really hated it, they wouldn't be here right
now.

TANZANICA KING:

I like that point.
We also have somebody else back in Number 4.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

My name is (saying name) Palmer. I'm working for the Electronic
Frontier Finland.

Page 14 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

I was slightly disappointed. This is my second ICANN meeting. I
was slightly disappointed by the fact there was no newbie
session in the beginning. And I heard the rumor that it might
have been too pressure not having anything on day zero, but
then there was, like, an eight-hour CCWG workshop. Like, why
couldn't you have a newbie workshop for them? It was pretty
hard to try to get people to come here and actually understand
what's going on here. And just two hours, one room, isn't that
much to ask for.

TANZANICA KING:

Over to Number 2.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Yes, hello, Olivier Crepin-LeBlond. I chair European At-Large
organization, but I will be making my own comments here.
You mentioned this is a meeting about policy. Please define
what "policy" is. Should we start a working group on this or -No, I'm just kidding.
The reason why I'm saying this is that there has been some really
serious decisions made on whether groups or work is policy or
not. I happen to be a co-chair of a cross-community working
group that deals with policy that takes place outside of ICANN
walls but some believe that this is not policy. So I would like to

Page 15 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

echo the point that other people have made that there should
be some flexibility in putting the schedule together and certainly
having a single track every afternoon is probably not the way to
go because you're just catering for a small segment or a certain
segment of the community but not for the others. So thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

And Number 3.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

Crept up behind me. Hi, it's Chris again. I just wanted to say a
couple of things. From my personal perspective, I agree with the
comments about the online schedule, I think that's challenging
and I couldn't see the whole day, and I find that hard. But I'm
not knocking for that. That's an issue -- an online schedule
that's easy to be fixed. I'm marking for the schedule -- the
format of the meeting as such.
And I marked -- I marked it needs improvement simply because I
think it's been great, but it always need improvement. So that's
why I put that in there. And it's the first time we've done it.
From a board member perspective, it's been fantastic to be able
to go to sessions, to sit at the back of the room, speak
occasionally -- some people might think too much -- and to

Page 16 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

listen to what's going on and learn. That's been amazingly
fantastic. Really, really good.
The cross-community stuff in the afternoon, I understand the
point about maybe more sessions, although it's challenging.
When we were putting this agenda together, I sat in on some of
the calls. And one of the challenges is if you actually look at the
issues, a lot of the issues are meaningful to the GNSO and to the
ALAC and the GAC. And then there might be some issues that are
meaningful to the ccNSO and the GAC. But there's not that
many issues that are meaningful across the board. So it is a
hard job to do, and I think for a first go we did pretty well.
So I'm -- I'd like to be totally positive about this. I think it's been
excellent. Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

And I think we're over at Number 4 next -- or 2? You guys argue.
Go ahead. Number 4. And then we'll go to 2.

WERNER STAUB:

Werner Staub from CORE. I'm also very happy about the crosscommunity way to avoid the separate deliberations in silos.
However, I think we might use more of the stuff that has already
shown its value. For instance, the microphone at the head of the

Page 17 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

aisle, it just stands there and people can queue up, should not
be suppressed.
I understand it's a good idea to sometimes be able to get a
microphone being brought to people who cannot easily move.
But don't suppress the microphone where people can queue up
because that's how people can, first of all, concentrate and
everybody knows who is speaking. All the time we have this
problem here not to know who is speaking at all because
everything comes from a loudspeaker. You don't know where to
turn. If I speak, you probably know it.
But as I say, there's a way to make sure we use those established
methods and also have the ability for people to kind of
concentrate before they get to the microphone. As they queue
up, they can concentrate. And it's probably easier for people to
speak than to have this uncertainty whether you can get a
microphone, have to get the attention of someone.

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Can I do a quick intersession there? You've reminded us that as
we get up to the microphone, as you stand up to speak, please

Page 18 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

identify yourself. We want to make sure everybody does that.
That's great. Thank you.
We also had a debate before this session started whether to put
a microphone right in the middle of the room and to see who
would start queuing up without saying anything just for a fun
little experiment. But I think it is something that the team is
going to look at. Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

So we're over at Number 2.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Tijani Ben Jemaa from ALAC. I speak in French. Having been
part of the working group that thought about this new strategy, I
would like to say that I'm completely satisfied with this meeting.
I like the format. It's very good. And that was the idea behind.
There have been certain problems but easy to solve.

For

instance, the parallel sessions, we have to find a room where not
too many people is gathered. But I'm disappointed in one issue.
We have had planned for an outreach session, and it was
unfortunate not to held that -- not to have -- that it was not
possible to hold this session here because of what Sebastien has
mentioned.

Page 19 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

So I hope the next B meeting will be in a place where we can do
some outreach.

ROB HOGGARTH:

We may have to make a judgment about how quickly you may
move onto the next topic. It's a good blending, I think, of topics.
But we may need to say whoever is in the queue on this, let's
stop there, microphone helpers, and then we'll see what we do
next. Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

It may be that your comments will still make perfect sense when
we go to the next question.
So if we go to the next slide, please. If we can do a poll again:
How satisfied were you with the time for focused policy work?
So as I said, this sort of still fits in with the schedule. Please
enter your selections from one to ten.
And we'll start with Number 4.

THOMAS SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. My name is Thomas Schneider from the GAC. I tried
to focus also on this, but there were a few points that I would
like to add to what you have discussed before, if you allow me.
First of all, I think the interactivity that we had -- sorry -- in this

Page 20 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

meeting was an absolute plus to the other meetings. Also, in the
time that was allocated for policy work, it was extremely hard
for the GAC to get to -- to discuss everything and draft the
communique in a lot less time that we normally have. But we
got there.
Also, because we had lots of different people coming in, we had
board members coming in, we had GNSO people coming in,
ccNSO people coming in, and so on and that actually -- my take
is that we need less time if we have everybody present that care
about an issue or are concerned with an issue than to talk to
everybody bilaterally.
Because you explain something once to all the stakeholders and
you understand each other much quicker, get a holistic picture
that allows you to be much more efficient.
I do understand there's flexibilities needed, that maybe we can
have some days, some afternoons where nothing is going on in
parallel. Just one session where you want to have everybody in
the room, but maybe, as Alan says, some of the days, there
should be like two parallel sessions in order to cope with more
issues. But sometimes it's good to force people to go into
somewhere where they think that they are not concerned or that
doesn't concern them. And then through sitting in, they actually

Page 21 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

realize, oh, this matters to me as well. So I would not completely
give up that part.
And as I said, the Board presence was extremely useful also in
our slots for the policy silo work. And this is something that
should probably be kept also for the other meetings to the
extent possible, that the Board can sneak into the silos and
participate there.
In our case, we did not have a bilateral with the Board in this
meeting, but we had, actually, far more in depth exchanges with
the Board in our silo work. So this is my take that I take from it.
And just one short word about the room setting. I think Marilyn,
with her experience also with different IGFs and EuroDIGs, is
right. The more round and face-to-face-looking settings you can
get, if the room permits, the easier is the interaction.
And the thing about the queuing behind the mic, the problem
with the queuing behind the mic is it's more difficult to react -to be interactive and reactive to what others say because you
queue up with something you want to say, and once you're in
the queue you have to speak at that particular moment. You
can't go back and come back in. Whereas, floating mics I think
allow for a much more red -- thread discussion because you're
more free in deciding when you're going to speak than if you
have to queue up at a mic.

Page 22 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

So this is much more rigid, the mic queuing. And I prefer this
way of interaction much more.
Thank you very much.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. I'm observing with the various hands and people
getting my attention that even this is challenging; right? And
this is, you know, one of those sessions where everybody does
have a point of view. So I appreciate everyone's patience as
there are people behind you who are also having their hands up
before you.
Number 1, please.

DAVID CAKE:

Hi, thank you. David Cake.
So I thought it was -- I mean, I thought it was really great to hear
people talking about how they didn't feel overscheduled and
they were able to move around and, you know, get involved in
the policy sessions they wouldn't normally otherwise, and I
think that's, you know, a very common experience. But actually,
as one of the people who was heavily involved in that policy
work, because I'm on the leadership for one of those -- the big
PDPs that we discussed, and so on, I actually did feel really quite

Page 23 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

overscheduled; right? I felt very, very busy and like I'd got my
normal ICANN crammed into slightly more -- slightly less time.
And for me, the sort of -- the -- you know, the idea of a meeting
without all of the other stuff and so on, I didn't actually -- I just
felt like I'd had the same meeting crammed into a smaller time.
And I don't know where we'd fit any outreach.
So for me, the general focus on policy sort of worked, but it
really did squeeze some of us quite a lot.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you.
We're going to go 2, 3, 2, 4. So just as people prepare.
Thank you.

FARZANEH BADII:

Farzaneh Badii from NCUC. And finally I got the microphone!
Okay. So I'm going to make a comment on your meeting strategy
and the fact that you keep calling it policy forum. While I'm
looking at the website and meeting strategy, and it says format
focus, policy work, and outreach.
So why are we keep calling it -- why do we keep call it policy
forum and deny the outreach part?

Page 24 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

And also, I can see that it says day one, outreach. I must have
missed something because I didn't see any outreach in day one
for our group. So, yeah, that's about it.
Thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you.
Number 3.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Thank you. First of all, thank you very much for this last session.
It's very important, this evaluation. It give you a little bit more
taste how the situation is.
I am not in favor of the queuing microphone. This floating
microphone is much better, although we just heard from our
distinguished colleagues there. But I don't want to go to the
queue, so on and so forth. So this is a good thing.
What I'm suggesting is do you think doing this type of forum
every year is not too long to have an experience or shouldn't we
consider whether we need every six months?
I found this very, very useful, very instructive, and very
productive; in particular, the cross-community session. We had
the wide range of information exchange freely and in a

Page 25 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

transparent matter rather than sitting and discussing board
meetings with the CWG -- sorry, with the GAC meeting with the
ccNSO, this type of meeting, et patati.
This one was very, very instructive and very, very useful. So I
suggest that we continue this sort of thing, but if possible,
consider whether we could do it every six months in order to
have more ideas. Then we decide whether it would be yearly or
whether it would be every six months.
Thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. Back to number 2.

EDMON CHUNG:

Hi, Edmon Chung here.
So I want to talk -- have a comment on, actually, number 2 and
number 3. So I think I remember number 3 is about the cross -cross-community work.
I like the fact that we have focused policy work and crosscommunity, but I think in order for us to be more productive, the
introductions could be shorter. Sitting sometimes -- some of the
topics are talked about in the cross-community session which
almost feel like an introduction for almost an hour, and then

Page 26 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

immediately the next day, there is the working group meeting
and we repeat some of those introduction and then go into
discussion.
I think the two of them could be better merged together so that
the entire introduction -- I think it's useful to have the
introduction, because some of the other people in the
community may not be up to speed on certain issues and it's
good to have some introduction, but we expect this to be a
policy forum, so whoever is coming in should, for lack of a better
word, to do a little bit of homework; right?
So we should be able to hit to the substantive issues much faster
and then have one session that almost merges the crosscommunity one and the policy focused work so that it flows into
it. So the new people can actually participate in the working
group, and that I think helps bring more people to ICANN policy
work as well.
So I guess the comment is 2 and 3 should be better somehow
integrated so that the introduction is shorter; substantive,
community-wide discussion longer.

Page 27 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

ROB HOGGARTH:

EN

Thank you. Before we go to number 4, just another observation.
We're now reaching that point in the session where people are
interested in making a second comment.
We are always going to err on the side of going to somebody new
who has not commented before. But, otherwise -- so some
people may jump the queue if they're new and you have been
waiting a little bit longer.

I just wanted to do that bit of

housekeeping.
And I referred to my colleagues as "microphone people" earlier.
They're colleagues, not microphone people.
[ Laughter ]

CARLOS GUTIERREZ:

Yes, thank you. Carlos Gutierrez, GNSO Council.
I think it was great for policy work. I'm really very, very satisfied
for the format you chose. So satisfied that I strongly support
Kavouss' proposal. We should have it two times a year and
include other separate face-to-face meetings.
And I was happy that the accountability group got an extra day.
We, at the competition review, tried to get a day or two here,
and we didn't get it. It would be most efficient if other separate

Page 28 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

face-to-face meetings can be consolidated with this type of
activity because they are very policy related.
I think the best logistic was to be back to back with the GAC.
That was wonderful. We could move very efficiently between
GAC and GNSO and as we try to have better understanding
between the different processes, between GAC and GNSO policymaking. It was very, very good. I don't know if somebody
planned it but it worked very well. It should be like this all the
time.
For people who work in policy, also we got a lot of flexibility by
the planning people. Yesterday we got opportunity to do a
policy forum between the ccNSO and the GNSO, and it was
great. It was, for us as co-chairs, great to have some senior
people managing the discussion and offering us some solutions
to move forward with these difficult issues we have to deal with.
We were very honored. I've never seen such a big presence of
the Board in our meetings, so thank you very much for the board
members.
Nevertheless, a negative point. It was a very high price to pay
not to get a T-shirt. I really -[ Laughter ]
-- miss that.

Page 29 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

Thank you.
[ Applause ]

ROB HOGGARTH:

Number 3, please.
Oh, we had -- I'm sorry, Sebastien. We have to observe our
standing rule.
Number 1, please.

ELSA:

Oh, okay. Hi. I'm Elsa. For the record, I work for the Gulf Center
for Human Rights and I'm Lebanese.
I just wanted to say that policy B, actually, for me, I saw ICANN
from a wider perspective.

And, in fact, through this policy

meeting I was able to go into more policy development working
groups than I could in my first Meeting A that I had in Dublin.
So I think this kind of meeting would encourage people to see
things with a wider perspective and would encourage them to
go and dive into working groups and start drafting more and be
more interested in ICANN.
And the second point would be I think for a Meeting B kind of
setting, newcomers are not very much encouraged to come

Page 30 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

here. I think old people with old experience in ICANN should be
in a policy B meeting. In a Meeting B policy -- in any case. Yeah.
Because I could see that newcomers here were a bit confused
and they didn't get the whole experience I got, for example, in
meeting "A."
So I just want to put this point down, and thank you for giving us
the chance to speak about all these things.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you.
Number 4. Sorry, Sebastien.

NIELS TEN OEVER:

Thank you. This is Niels ten Oever, for the record. I definitely
can say I really enjoyed Meeting B because it was possible to
also get some sleep, which definitely also improved the
experience, but what was a bit sad is that the Cross-Community
Working Party on ICANN's Corporate and Social Responsibility to
Respect Human Rights, we were not able to get a session, even
though that work was being discussed in the CCWG
Accountability and in the GAC. And I think it would have really
worked to coordinate that work and feed in and get that crosscommunity work going.

Page 31 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

I understand it happens with CCWGs, but not all crosscommunity work is happening in cross-community working
groups.
So it might be a good point to also take that into account into
next Meeting B.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you.
We're going to go number 3, and then, Josh, heads up, we're
going to move the poll.
Number 3.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Sebastien Bachollet speaking.
I would like to mention two things. Something that has been
forgotten is how we can prepare better it meeting so as to avoid
an introduction on the podium to the whole of the room, not to
give any lecture. What can we do, then, for the conferences that
give some background to the participants so these participants
may come here and -- to a face-to-face meeting ready for
discussion. Because when you're here, you're not here to be
lectured but to participate in an interactive discussion.

Page 32 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

It has been said before, and I've heard this in a meeting during
this week, that we should stop calling it A, B, and C meeting. And
I think that's okay. We should open a contest, a contest to
baptize to give names to each of these meetings. The first, the
second and the third during the calendar year. And we should
then vote for a name. I think that would be interesting.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Go ahead and put up the next poll, which as we've observed is
already shift to go the cross-community sessions and how these
are organized.
We've already gotten a number of comments about this area.
We certainly would love to capture the votes and the opinions
that the rest of you have to express about that.
So let's continue the dialogue consistent with the discussions of
the policy work, melded in with the actual running of these
afternoon sessions.
Some of the feedback has already focused on the layout of the
room, the agenda and the preparation of the individual
presenters and moderators.
Let's hear a little bit more about that if we can.
I see number 2.

Page 33 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

EN

Okay. Vanda Scartezini from ALAC.
My point is I do believe we need to go a little bit deeper inside
the discussion. Most of our model, even in a cross-constituency,
is someone presents, most of the people listen, and in the end
there are just few of us has time to express their ideas and
discuss, really.
So my suggestion is that to have you know the presentation, the
idea, like Sebastien said, maybe well prepared for the people
that are running that and the people that will be attending. And
you have some, you know, like round tables with let's call
multistakeholder participations in each table. And the points to
be discussed will be there.
We need a large -- more time for those sessions, because the
participation is poor because we have no time.
So even people mostly, well, maybe next to you are thinking and
you don't have the time to really discuss the opinion that you
want to, and then you go out.
And this time, we are running from one session to another
because there was a lot of single, small time. And I personally
had a few of I'm missing something because I could not
attending that meeting. Attending the other meeting.

Page 34 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

It was a little running time most of the time. And maybe we
need to rethink a little bit about also the -- how we do this kind
of distribution.
Thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. Do any of my colleagues have anyone immediately
because I have a gentleman -- two gentlemen down front here.
Ozan, you can come on down here. Right here first. As Ozan is
coming back, one of the things I'd like to tease out, if some of
you could think about it because we are focused and we're
doing the poll right now in this session. No one's talked about
the -- as much as I'd like to, some of the morning sessions. And
to really get a perspective of some of you who have been
involved in the actual working group efforts within each
community and this aspect of having dedicated community time
every morning to really focus on some of the work. So if anyone
has thoughts on that, please think about it or pull those
together. And we'll turn back to the microphone. Microphone
number 1.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Hi there. Jordyn Buchanan with Google. And I'm the worst
person to talk about the morning sessions because I'm not

Page 35 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

actively involved with any of the sort of current policy work. So
that meant the afternoon sessions were my ICANN. So as the
previous speaker mentioned that's great. I got a lot more sleep
at this ICANN than I usually do.
I really want to echo Vanda's comments and bring in something
Edmon said earlier which is I just felt like the cross-community
sessions were way too time constrained to actually feel very
useful to me. But there was so -- and combining that with what
Edmon said earlier, there was so much presentation brought
into each session, it was very hard to have a lot of substantive
conversation.

It was doubly hard to have the substantive

conversation because on the one hand it's great we have
everyone from the community in one room. On the other hand,
it's not that great because you have hundreds of people in the
room, and it's very, very difficult to have a meaningful,
substantive discussion with that many people at once. So I think
somehow we need to give ourselves a little bit more time to
make those conversations substantive, and that probably just
means we have to do something that the ICANN community is
terrible at, and make some hard decisions and drop things off
the agenda, even though everyone is going to want to talk about
their particular thing or maybe it does involve some of the
overlapping where we talk. We can't quite have everyone in one

Page 36 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

room, but we'll have parallel tracks so we have a little bit more
time for some of the things.
And secondly, you have to -- somehow the moderators have to
figure out how to break down the discussion into smaller bits
and pieces, with the whole community involved in the room but
not necessarily all in the same conversation, with some report
out afterwards.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you very much. I believe Alan went before. So number -we're going back to number 1 here in front.

ASHWIN SASONGKO:

Thank you. It's the first time, of course, we followed the new
type of meetings. It is just my direct comment for this new
system. Number one, yes, I like this one because like the GAC
meeting here, we have the cross-community and so on and so
we know more and more.
Secondly, I personally think that three times meeting like this is
still necessary because -- well, Chris mentioned perhaps once a
year, for example. But I think the three times per thing like this
is still important. Perhaps we can next year -- perhaps we can
evaluate this because the ICT development is so fast. We have
IANA transfer. We have VeriSign testing with the root server

Page 37 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

management testing. We have many other things. Now with
this fast changing the -- we have to know exactly what is
happening and, of course, we can -- we can read the report, of
course. But it's different with -- if I talk to you directly like this
because I can see if it is important you will say oh, this is
important, you know. It's something like that.
It might be different with, say, what is the closest to Internet, to
ITU meeting. ITU council is an annual meeting, but between this
annual meeting we have hundreds -- many, many, many ITU
subgroup meeting. WRC meeting, you have the Asia-Pacific
meeting, Asia tele community, and so on and so on. The ITR, the
Internet Telecommunication Regulations, is once so many years,
once every so many years, but that is for a regulation that every
country has to sign. And we need the full power from minister of
-- minister of foreign affairs and so on and so on. So yes, it is
regulations and it has to be there for a few years. Not one year.
Not -- we do not renew ITU every year. It will make everybody
difficult. But for WRC, yes, we change very, very, very often.
So I think it depends on the nature of the -- of the organization
as how often we have to meet.

From my point of view, I

personally feel comfortable with three times meeting and you
say something, I don't know how it will looks like, this B meeting
policy. Do not know what is the next one. I should have another
feeling.

Page 38 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

Another one is that we don't have the so-called big exhibition
here, like the one we had in Marrakech or the one we had in
Dublin. We don't have big -- big exhibitions. Now, I miss that
because with the exhibition we know exactly what is happening
in many fields, at least in that particular country. So you go oh,
this country is becoming this and this and so on and so on. It's
just my feeling. For example, ICANNWiki is not there so I cannot
print my nice face, you know, for fun, of course. So thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. We're going to go to -- let me take a quick look. Do
we have anyone else in the queue -- we'll go -- we'll go -- we have
two people with two. And then we'll move to the next item on
the agenda. Thank you. Yeah, I know you have two people.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

ROB HOGGARTH:

And Alan. We'll do those three. Thanks, Benedetta.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Okay. Tijani again, and in French again. This is Tijani Ben
Jemaa.

Page 39 of 70

We're not talking about cross-community working

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

sessions. So when I comes to this point I would say I like the
format. I think we should have a panel with members speaking
and that the distribution of those panelists should include
diversity because CCTs, a cross-community session, the whole
community should be represented by the panelist. In that way
we would be able to learn the point of view of every community.
So each community should be represented on the panel and a
panelist should have short interventions before giving the floor
to the audience.
Also, I believe it is a good setup of the session there are
sometimes facilitators who are not experts on the topic but they
do know how to manage a meeting, how to run a meeting. They
ensure the diversity of topics and that it's interesting. Thank
you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

... and then Kim will have one last up here. I realized I forgot a
gentleman up here.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Alan Greenberg answering the question on how are the morning
sessions. Unlike Jordyn I got much less sleep than normal. We
had sessions scheduled from 7:00 -- from 8:00 a.m. on and they
were pretty fully packed. And some of us do work in multiple

Page 40 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

areas and, you know, we, of course, had the -- the conflicts of, in
my case ALAC versus GNSO meetings held in parallel. That's a
reality of all ICANN meetings, but it certainly -- since the
meetings were more compressed here, there were no gaps in the
ALAC schedule and, therefore, everything was a conflict. That's
the way it goes.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. Back to number 2, and then we'll wrap up with
number 1.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

This is Sebastien Bachollet, and I will speak in French. I heard
two (indiscernible) talking about this issue of meetings. I want
to make a point of clarification. I don't believe we should have
more than three meetings, ICANN meetings a year. But each
should be focused on an organization or focused on a certain
topic. So we are talking about this meeting within a year. This
does not mean that we will have only one meeting. It means
that we will have only one B meeting per year. So the fact of
having different meetings does not mean that what is happening
here will not be implemented in another meeting. We can do -apply exactly the same in another meeting.

Page 41 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

TANZANICA KING:

First, I think we're going to number one.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Yes.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Yes. Thank you. You asked about the morning session. It was
very, very effective.

The only thing that sometimes missed

because there are so many parallel. But it was effective and very
useful, instructive, and we really benefit from that.
I have just one point.

Please kindly do not consider it as

criticism. The moderator and the panelists should not take any
position with respect to the subject under discussions. Should
just explain the issue and leave it to the others to comment. If
they push for particular things, that has negative impact. We
have at least two of them, and I don't want to say that, that the
panelists pushing for particular positions. It is better if they
agree kindly to avoid that. Thank you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Okay. And if we can move forward to the next slide. Our next
question is about how satisfied were you with your

Page 42 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

opportunities to interact with the board. We've heard some
good comments already.

We'd like to get some more

comments. And I see Marilyn up here, so we can start with
number 2.

MARILYN CADE:

Thank you. My name is Marilyn Cade. I was probably -- I would
say I was very satisfied with it because the board of directors
clearly made an effort to spend their time -- not just the board of
directors but also the staff's made an effort to spend their time
to be in the rooms and to be available and to interact. And I
think that's a real plus, and I'm also going to applaud the fact -this is only half humorous. I am also going to applaud the fact
that most of them were actively engaging and not checking -having to check their email to see which meeting they had to run
off to. So it really was a plus. And I think they also, by not
having their working committees, which are a lot of
responsibility for them and really important, but not conducting
a lot of those working committees, they had the time to be with
the community. Now, I'm going to offer a thought that perhaps
even somebody sitting next to me might want to comment on. I
know all the board of directors by -- I know them personally. I
recognize them. They know me. I know them because I've
worked with them for years. If I were -- and I think the social
events that went back-to-back each night, that were here, were

Page 43 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

also excellent because the board, the senior staff, and the
community were able to see each other night after night after
night, easy to get to. I will say if I were a brand new person,
finding a board member by myself without a spirit guide might
have been very challenging.

TANZANICA KING:

Okay. And we'll go back to number 3.

VANDA SCARTEZINI:

Okay. Vanda again. Just to say that we have a very good
experience this time. The board coming to ALAC and to stay with
us, the CEO and many members, and it was a very good and
large productive meeting. So it was a really, really good one. So
the experience was good, and I will (indiscernible) that the night
meetings, you know, the cocktail meetings that we had, was a
very good opportunity because the days were so running and we
had a very good opportunity to share with all members of the
board during this time. So I believe that we have a very, very
good -- you know, I'm here for 17 years, so it's something that for
the first time you feel the newcomers could really touch the
board. Thank you.

Page 44 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

TANZANICA KING:

EN

Okay. And we're going to go to number 2 twice, and then we'll
go back to number 1 and then to 3.

MICHELE NEYLON:

Thanks. I'm Michele Neylon, for the record. Just on this topic of
the interaction of the board of directors, I thought it was
interesting at this meeting that Goran, the new CEO, was kind of
floating around and going into working group sessions. And
unlike his predecessors, he didn't make a big scene. He came in,
he sat down. I normally spotted him as I could see Cassia. It was
kind of if I generally see -- if I see Cassia I know he can't be far
behind.

And he just observed without disrupting things.

Whereas previous CEOs it was always this kind of big song and
dance. Oh, look here comes the CEO, all bow down. Whereas
Goran seems to be much more interested in just kind of seeing
what's going on and getting an idea of what we're all up to,
which I think it makes a pleasant change.
As for interactions with other board of director -- members of the
board of directors, hard to say. I've heard from some people
kind of mixed -- mixed views, that some people say I saw more
interaction. Others saw them sitting in meeting rooms but
didn't feel that they were interacting that much. And I think
there's -- it's like with all these things. You're going to get mixed
views. It's hard -- what somebody said to me is, you know,

Page 45 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

meeting B as a concept, you know, need to give it a couple of
goes before you can make a definitive decision on whether it's a
good idea or bad idea.
Because what's happening at this meeting is going to be tainted
by what's going on out there at the moment, be that IANA
transition, U.S. presidential elections, new CEO, et cetera, et
cetera, moving location. They all have an impact which make
this particular meeting very specific, and a future meeting in this
format could be completely different. Thanks.

TANZANICA KING:

We have a second Number 2.

GEORGE SADOWSKY:

Okay. Thank you. George Sadowsky. I'm a member of the
board. We -- I think the great majority of the board has been
around and present and interacting more or less with people
here. We're not -- I think we're pretty approachable, but it takes
-- it's going to take effort on the part of attendees here to say,
There's a board member. Let's go talk to him. We may agree or
disagree with something he said or felt or expressed or just want
to talk and introduce yourself. Don't be hesitant. Do it.

Page 46 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

TANZANICA KING:

EN

Then we're going to going back to Number 1 and then we'll go to
Number 3.

CHRIS DISSPAIN:

Hi, it's Chris Disspain again. I would be very, very interested, if
they're prepared to say something, from anyone who put "not at
all" as part of the survey. We haven't had a lot of "not at a "
down the line so far in the other questions. And I would really
like to hear from anybody who is prepared to say why they're
not satisfied at all. Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Okay. Number 1 -- sorry, are we up at 3? Chris was 1.

EDMON CHUNG:

Edmon Chung here, not responding to Chris' call, though,
because I put my hand up earlier.
Very quick comment. I know we talked about this before, but I
still think a public forum is useful and it gives the community an
interactive session with the board. Maybe we can bring it back
to meeting B. Maybe this particular session. This is the first time
we do it, so this session is useful. But this particular time slot
can used for a public forum. So that's just my comment.

Page 47 of 70

EN

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

TANZANICA KING:

Number 4.

JORDYN BUCHANAN:

Hi, it's Jordyn Buchanan with Google again. I kind of -- I wish
there was a "not applicable" option here.

I guess I was

disappointed that this question needed to be asked in that this
is a policy forum and the board is not a policy-making body. And
so I don't know why anyone would particularly care if they came
to a policy forum and could talk to the board or not.
I think just in general, we ought to focus on the community
making policy as opposed to sort of like leaning on the board to
do it.
Now, I did -- in one of the sessions, Erika Mann -- that I was in,
Erika Mann got up and made a very nice intervention talking
about the difference between European safe harbor -- E.U. safe
harbor versus privacy shield.

That was a very useful

contribution, not in her capacity as a board member but as a
knowledged and learned person. It's a great that we have board
members that are knowledgeable.

I want them to be

knowledgeable about these topics and so it's great to see them
in the room.
But I think whether or not we are interacting with them as board
members, as opposed to whether there are board members

Page 48 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

active and being active in the process, I think that's a somewhat
different question.

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you. We're going to go back to Number 3 and then 2.

DONNA AUSTIN:

Hey, Tanzi. It's Donna Austin.
Jordyn, just to respond to what you just said, one of the things
with the meeting strategy working group that came up was that
the board doesn't interact enough -- excuse me -- with the
community. So that's what this is getting at. And it's not so
much that the board -- you're right, board doesn't make policy.
But I think enabling the board to be in the sessions where the
policy is being discussed actually educates them. So I think
that's -- you know, from my perspective, that's one of the
benefits of having -- giving the board the ability to roam around
and not being stuck in a room somewhere not knowing what's
going on. Thanks.

TANZANICA KING:

Back at Number 2 and then we're going to go forward to the next
question, I think.

Page 49 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

ELSA SAADE:

EN

Hi again. Elsa Saade, from the Netherlands.
I just wanted to say -- and I'm going to be a bit subjective here -that in this meeting, I saw more women from the ICANN board,
and this made me feel so empowered as a woman in this sphere.
And their statements especially in cross-community working
groups were excellent, and they -- I mean, listening to them and
listening to their expertise would definitely inspire me to be
more included in this process in ICANN and come back at some
point and do my best to look up to them and do my best to be as
good as they are.
So thank you to the women in the ICANN board, Rinalia,
Lousewies, everyone, for whatever you're doing right now. You
are empowering us as women. Thank you.
[ Applause ]

TANZANICA KING:

And if we can move forward the slides.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Oh, you're looking at me because this is my assignment.

TANZANICA KING:

I'm looking at you because this is yours.

Page 50 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

ROB HOGGARTH:

EN

I think we would be well-served to look at the next two items
generally together. We'll take a break at some point in the
discussion to have folks answer the last piece. And I know there
were a couple of you that wanted to touch on the board of
directors piece.
This area of focus is really on the outreach and engagement
side. And I would be very interested to hear feedback on that
because as one of the participants already noted, they didn't see
a good bit of outreach or engagement in the part of the schedule
they had identified.

And I know a number of different

communities viewed the concept of outreach and engagement
in slightly different ways, recognizing the multistakeholder
nature of our work.
So as you're thinking about potentially commenting, if you can
give some thoughts to that, contribute some thoughts in that
area, that would be very helpful.
Continuing in order, we have 4 right up front here, Emily, and
then we'll go to 1. You can comment on the last comment as
well as on this one. So please take advantage of it, if you would
like.

Page 51 of 70

EN

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Just a simple comment. We should not compare the former CEO
with the present one. They are coming from different cultures,
different background, different missions, and so on and so forth.
Let us not compare the people. Both are respectful and so on.
The objective of this meeting is not to judge the people. Thank
you.

ROB HOGGARTH:

And Number 1.

OLIVIER CREPIN-LEBLOND: Olivier

Crepin-LeBlond,

organization.

EURALO,

European

At-Large

I actually put one for this question because

although the ALAC did do a bit of work to try and get as much
outreach and engagement as possible with the local
communities, we didn't -- I don't think we got any of the local
community. And, of course, that's due to various reasons and so
on because originally we were supposed to be in Panama. But I
hope that the next meeting B will be able to actually have full
outreach and engagement with the local community and make
full use of that.
And, again, just to echo on the concerns about this being just
called a policy meeting, we might wish to say "policy and
outreach meeting." Thank you.

Page 52 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

ROB HOGGARTH:

EN

Thank you. Just a quick observation that some of you may have
been having throughout the course of the session about the
scientific nature of our polling. I appreciate the comments and
your patience with this. This is not intended to be a purely
scientific exercise. But we hope that we're going to be getting
some good trends or senses of the room, if you will. But we will
look at these and I will talk later about how we're going to use it.
I think Number 3 is next. Kim, thank you.

MARK DATYSGELD:

Thank you, sir. I'm Mark Datysgeld. I come to this meeting
under the condition of NextGen ambassador. And I would like to
identify the community about the new shape of the program
that took part in this meeting. We are actually five ambassadors
who have been NextGen before working each with three
NextGen. And this has been a very positive experience, I think,
because for us, as far as ambassadors are concerned, we have
been able to engage -- or forced, rather, to engage much more
with the constituencies so that we would have as much
knowledge as possible to pass on to them. And at the same
time, the NextGen were very engaged and able to access the
community because of the efforts of the communities to talk to

Page 53 of 70

EN

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

them and due to having direct access to an ambassador in a very
structured way.
So in this sense, the meeting was welcoming for newcomers, at
least under this format, because we have seen how much they
have been able to take out of this experience.
So as far as the NextGen program is concerned, I think I can
speak for most of us, that it has been a very positive learning
experience and it has been worked.

And the format does

support the program as long as there is proper training and the
correct approach to this which I think was something that
happened at the season.

Thank you very much for your

attention. That is my comment.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. (indiscernible) is right in front of me, so I can't see
behind if we have got any folks back there. All right. number 1
right here up front.

MARILYN CADE:

Thank you. Marilyn Cade speaking. I'm going to distinguish for
purposes of this -- my comments between outreach and
engagement. And the reason I'm going to do that is normally at
ICANN meetings, the business constituency has been most
successful in our outreach to the community when we have

Page 54 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

been able to take advantage of publicizing the welcoming
ceremony where there is typically a high-level government
speaker and then there's a reception in the evening and then on
the Tuesday morning, we collaborate with others from the crossconstituency group to do a breakfast that is very often with the
governments.

And that's a good marketing way to reach

businesses in that local area who have never been to an ICANN
meeting and to interest them in sticking at least their -- getting
in up to their knees in an ICANN meeting and spending at least
two days.
For this meeting, because policy was the topic, although I have a
very strong relationship with the ICT association here in Helsinki,
they were not interested in coming and going into a deep policy
dive because they felt it was over their head.
So this is not a criticism.

Now I'm going to talk about

engagement. Engagement, on the other hand, we did do in the
business constituency by identifying a particular couple of
potential strong targets for membership who want to get -knew they wanted to get more involved in ICANN. So we took a
different approach here having understood that we weren't
going to get the entire ICT sector but instead trying to engage
just one or two people and then working very closely together.
So I want to make that distinction because I think as we evaluate
our outreach strategy in the B.C., we're going to need to

Page 55 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

differentiate what we have to market, so to speak, at each of the
meetings.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. Number 4.

AVRI DORIA:

This is Avri speaking again, another one of the same old people
that always speak.
I'm actually really happy with the way outreach and
engagement worked out here on this one because we backed off
spending any of the precious time we needed for policy by
having those outreachy events and, yet, managed to pull a
bunch of people in and actually get them engaged in doing the
policy meetings with the rest of us. I think we actually managed
to reach a different crowd of people, those who weren't
interested in come hang with us and have some drinks but those
who were actually interested in jumping into the stuff we do.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you.
Do we have anyone else on this topic? Okay.
Let's move to the next one, Tanzanica.

Page 56 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

TANZANICA KING:

EN

Great. We've got 13 minutes to go before cocktails, which takes
us into this next question. How satisfied were you with the
opportunities for networking and social interaction?

ROB HOGGARTH:

I like that delayed response.

TANZANICA KING:

I had to look at the clock.
So do we have some comments? And they can be -- as we're
wrapping up the session in ten minutes, you can make
comments on any of these subjects, I think. And we'll start with
Number 2.

MICHELE NEYLON:

Michele Neylon again for the record. I thought it was nice this
time around that there was an organized social event of some
kind every evening. I didn't get to attend many of them because
there were external ones as well. But I thought in terms of the
ability for people to do that, I thought, that was positive. I think
that was good.
Moving beyond the evening cocktail-type thing, this facility,
although it seemed to not have much space, that was a bit

Page 57 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

misleading because there were tons of little nooks and crannies.
And I kept on kind of finding people -- I won't say hiding but kind
of tucked away in a corner that managed to find a table, a
couple of chairs, having meetings and everything else. And then
you had that nice kind of cafe thing downstairs and the bar,
which was nice. So I thought it worked pretty well.
It's much better than some of the other venues we have been in
where we have been spread out across multiple separate
buildings and trying to find somebody when they say, Oh, I'll
meet you at the registration desk. And then, of course, they
can't find the registration desk and you spend 25 minutes just
missing that person. So I thought it was good.

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you. And number 2. I believe you turn around. There you
go.

EDMON CHUNG:

Edmon Chung again. Sorry to keep speaking but trying to make
it short in every intervention.
I think the scheduled receptions every day is good. It's -- But
probably want to rotate the actual venue, because I see the
number of people joining kind of decline over the days. It may

Page 58 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

help if you rotate, but I guess logistically it's harder. That's just a
suggestion.
I'm curious why this session, the Adobe Connect room is not
open, or is it just me? Because I think a lot of feedback can be
done with the chat and text, because rather than just the mic, a
lot of the things could be just, you know -- healthy discussion
usually happens in the text.

ROB HOGGARTH:

Thank you. I think we're -- Josh, you can explain what may be
happening technically that Tanzanica and I are not seeing.

JOSH BAULCH:

I'm really happy to tell you right now that we're using Adobe
Connect hosted through Adobe Connect, the corporate. We
have a lot of little problems like this.
Over the next 60 days, we'll be migrating to our own servers, so
we will run into much less issues like this.

TANZANICA KING:

Page 59 of 70

Okay. We'll take a question back in number 3.

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

EN

Good evening, everybody. I am Satia (phonetic). I have come
from India, and I belong to Hyderabad.
This is the first time I have ever boarded an international flight,
and I have come on this beautiful purpose here. And I don't
want to speak anything technical or nontechnical. As a mother
and as a teacher for so many years, I just want to share a few
words with all of you.
I see a beautiful unity of diversity in this hall in ICANN. I feel
ICANN is like a garden, and computers are its flowers and the
Internet is its fragrance.
And we all, as gardeners in the ICANN garden, we should try to
make a beautiful garden in which our future generations will
enjoy the fruits of Internetization. And let's all together make
the planet a paradise of knowledge, information, and bring
more humanity in the world.
Thank you.
[ Applause ]

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you. It was very nice to meet you earlier this week.
We'll go to number 2. Or do we go to 1?

Page 60 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

Sebastien, can I have you wait one second while we go to
somebody new at number 1 I did not see.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Yes, of course.

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you. Number 1.

SIVASUBRAMANIAN:

Yeah, I'm Sivasubramanian. Just a very fine observation. We
have -- In ICANN meetings on Tuesdays, we have party by Afilias,
one party by Dyn, one party by VeriSign, and several other
parties which are quite dispersed, and sometimes we have to
attend more than one party.
Instead, if there is some agreement --

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).
[ Laughter ]

SIVASUBRAMANIAN:

If there is some agreement, if everything could happen on a
Thursday in one place where Afilias brings music and VeriSign

Page 61 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

brings wine and Dyn brings whiskey and somebody sponsors
dinner, it will be great.
[ Applause ]
So you can serve wine with VeriSign written on the wine bottle.
Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you very much.
We will go over to Sebastien now.

SEBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Sebastien Bachollet speaking.
In order to continue with these comments, I think since we have
parties in the evening around a glass of something, it's really a
major step forward.
I regret that in Marrakech we did not have that much number of
parties because you may meet people in a nice environment. So
this time we had parties every evening, and I think that was
good.
Perhaps we may find a way to do different things every single
night. And in the previous session, speed dating was mentioned.
So perhaps we may have some kind of speed dating in the next

Page 62 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

meetings during the evenings so as to get to know each other
better.

TANZANICA KING:

I have to pause for that, too. Sorry.
So do we have any other questions or comments or....
Nobody okay.
Go forward? Yes. I did not see you. We'll go to number 2.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

This is not about networking. Just to say a simple thank you for
ICANN. I'm from Sri Lanka, and this is the first time I'm attending
this ICANN meeting. And I would say a first time a Sri Lankan has
been attending, which we have 21 million population. But I
would like to give one suggestion, that a little more of more
orientation would have done a lot, because that way I'm more
prepared for these meetings when I come because I'm coming
with one intention, to contribute and to give my best. So a little
bit of networking. If not for Marilyn and Jimson, I think I would
have been lost.
So for the newcomers, a little bit of orientation would definitely
help.
Thank you.

Page 63 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you. And I believe we have somebody at number 3.

SONIGITU EKPE:

Thank you. My name is Sonigitu Ekpe. This is my first ICANN. In
fact, I'm really very pleased for making it to this meeting
because this meeting has synchronized with the OECD
ministerial meeting in Cancun. So I am really very fulfilled.
Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Okay. Thank you. Oh, it depends who gets here first. Number 2.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you very much. This is my third meeting, and I virtually
noticed especially it's been said for a long time in GAC that there
is a consistency of the participation by a few countries.
I am just hoping for future meetings this would improve.
Especially for my brothers on the African continent. You get one
or two only people participating.
Again, there was mention that ICANN would have a meeting with
the African group. This is an area we need to look at so that we
improve our participation.

Page 64 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

The Internet belongs to all of us.
Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

Okay. And we will stick with number 2, a new speaker, and then
we will go to number 4.

DANKO JEVTOVIC:

Hi, my name is Danko Jevtovic, .RS.
Two short, maybe technical, but still, notes. I like the scheduling
application, but it would be beneficiary if we had some idea of
the schedule before. I'm mainly involved in the ccNSO, but I
don't plan my days here very well because basically I could have
gone home today, not tomorrow, because there was not too
much work.
And the other small, also, technical thing, the schedule app on
mobile is very good, but I selected what I wanted to attend on
the -- with the desktop version, from the browser, I logged in,
and when I logged in in the mobile app, it didn't pick it up. So
it's some small, maybe, issue for next time.
Thanks.

Page 65 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you. And we'll go to number 4. That's you.

KAVOUSS ARASTEH:

Thank you. Let me just tell the good things. First of all, thank
you very much. Really, we appreciate the way that you run the
meeting. The gentleman was quite kind with everybody. And,
really, you deserve a big round of applause. This is number one.
[ Applause ]
Number two, if someone wishes to speak, it is not required to
refer to the age of the others or their own. I am not interested in
the singer. I'm interested in the song.
I don't think it is appropriate saying that from the old or not old
people. Let us not refer to the age.
I am proud to be old.
[ Laughter ]
[ Cheers and applause ]
Very proud to be old. But at the same time, I am active.
Today was 25,000 emails that I have received for the ICANN and
CCWG. CCWG, 21,000. So active.
But I don't mind to be old or not old. But I request kindly the
people please and please refrain to refer to the age of others.

Page 66 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

Thank you.

TANZANICA KING:

And I have to respond just slightly to that. I have been at ICANN
14 years. Some people call me old and some people call me
young.
Number 3 in the back.

ARINOLA AKINYEMI:

My name is Arinola Akinyemi from Nigeria.
This is my first ICANN meeting, but it has afforded me the
opportunity to learn more about ICANN and helped me to
resolve better to be part of the policy decisions in the -- on the
Internet issues.
The organization is, for me, interesting. I find the environment
very impressive. And, actually, moving around, networking with
people and meeting people from different parts of the world on
Internet issues has really been enlightening for me.
Thank you.
[ Applause ]

TANZANICA KING:

Page 67 of 70

Thank you.

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

And if we go to the next slide, we're going to wrap up.
We're looking ahead at Hyderabad. So this is a -- just a general
schedule overview for you to see.
We're looking forward to taking all of this feedback. This was
really good feedback that we got, by the way. I'm sorry you had
to stay an extra day, but I'm glad we were able to get your
feedback.
We're go to take all of this into account, obviously, for the next
policy forum, or whatever we may call it. And we're also going to
take this forward, too, for the next meeting because I think all of
it applies in terms of how we meet, what it is that you're trying to
get out of the meeting and what you liked and what you didn't
like.
And if we go forward one more slide.

ROB HOGGARTH:

We very much appreciate all of the input that you have provided
on the polls, at this session, and potentially what you're going to
supply us later.
Tanzanica is going to take all this input.

The transcripts,

whatever did make it into the chat in the Adobe Connect room

Page 68 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

EN

earlier in the session. Collate it, curate it, provide some analysis,
and it's going to go on the community Wiki.
She'll probably have a blog post announcing when it does go on
there.
And in the spirit of constant and never-ending improvement, we
hope that you will individually or encourage others to go check it
out and help because it's going to become a part of the planning
efforts for the next policy forum in Johannesburg.
So thank you all very much for taking the time, making the
effort. We've enjoyed the good will and good nature here, the
constructive feedback because it is very serious.

This is a

substantial commitment that you all make from a time
perspective.

There's a substantial investment from the

organization, and we want to make it work for all of you and
continue to work with you to do that.
Thank you all very much.
[ Applause ]

TANZANICA KING:

Thank you.
[ Applause ]

Page 69 of 70

HELSINKI – ICANN56 Policy Forum Wrap-Up & Looking Ahead to ICANN57

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 70 of 70

EN

