HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 10:30 to 11:45 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

DENNIS CHANG:

So we’re going to get started about five minutes. Feel free to
come up and sit at the table, please. There’s plenty of room at
the table. Please come up and sit at the table and if you like to
speak later and ask questions, please speak into the microphone
for the recording.
We’ll be getting started in about two minutes. Please feel free to
come up and seat at the table. Everybody is welcome.
It’s 10:30 now, so we’ll be getting started. Everybody, please
have a seat.
The recording had started. So let’s get this meeting started.
This is the Amending the New gTLD Registry Agreement session
at ICANN 56 in Helsinki. Welcome, everyone.
My name is Dennis Chang, GDD Services and Engagement
Program Director, and I will be moderating this session today.
So please, for those people who are online and for the recording,
when you speak, state your name and then talk into the

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

microphone. For those of you who are in the back, there’s a
couple of roving microphones on both sides that you can use.
Let me start by introducing the panels that we have. So I would
like the panel members to introduce themselves starting at the
top with Jon. Go ahead.

JON NEVETT:

Jon Nevett from Donuts, and I chaired the Working Group.

SUSAN PAYNE:

Hi, Susan Payne from Valideus. I was a member of the Working
Group on behalf of the Brand Registry Group.

RUBENS KUHL:

Rubens Kuhl, NIC.br, Registries Stakeholder Group.

CYRUS NAMAZI:

Cyrus Namazi, ICANN Global Domains Division.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Hi, everybody. Krista Papac with the Global Domains Division as
well.

FRANCISCO ARIAS:

Page 2 of 36

Francisco Arias, [also] ICANN staff.

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

DENNIS CHANG:

EN

Thank you. We will review the agenda.
So first, we’ll provide some background of this amendment
process and present to you the proposed changes to the new
gTLD agreement, and public comment period we’ll discuss, a
few milestones that’s important, and provide some helpful links
for you to follow-up later.
And then, we’re going to open it up for a question and answer
session with the panel. So what I would like to ask you is to hold
your questions until the question and answer session because
for the first few minutes here, I’ll be going through some general
information for everyone.
So how did this amendment process begin? The Section 7.7 of
the Registry Agreement provides the mechanism where ICANN or
the Working Group appointed by the Registry Services
Stakeholder Group to periodically process or propose the
amendments to the agreement.
In July 2014, this process was initiated with RySG and then since
then, the Working Group of the RySG and ICANN had been
discussing a set of revisions to the Registry Agreement. And
those discussions or bilateral negotiations after 18 months have

Page 3 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

resulted in a set of proposed changes, which is presented to you
today.
What are the changes? Some of the changes are clarifying
responsibilities and updating to the term more of the
administrative type of changes.
The proposed revisions were largely focused on technical
corrections and clarifications. And the ICANN published a
summary of these changes on our website, and I’m sure you
have all seen that.
The final revisions will be implemented using the global
agreement rather than restating the existing registry, and this is
an important point we’ll discuss further later. The newly
contracted gTLDs will be signing the fully amended Registry
Agreement is the plan.
Specifically, section by section, we will talk about what the
changes are. On the monthly reporting, we provide a change
where registry operator with the flexibility to defer the first
month’s report if the delegation has occurred during the second
half of the month. You also clarify that registry operator will
include domain names created during the pre-delegation testing
in the monthly report if the names have not been deleted at the
time of the delegation.

Page 4 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

Section 2.9 for registrars, we propose a revision to clarify that
under the formal Registry Agreement that ICANN does not
approve pricing changes. Can you all see that? Okay.
Section 5.2, Arbitration wise, we are specifying the manner in
which the arbitrator will be selected for arbitration proceedings.
Section 6.7, Fee Reduction Waiver, we’re proposing that ICANN
may determine to reduce the fee payable by the registry
operator under the Registry Agreement. Under this provision,
ICANN will retain discretion to determine whether a reduction in
fees is appropriate, including the terms of any such reduction.
In 7.5 (f), Change of Control in Assignment and Subcontracting
section, we proposed a revision creating a new defined term
“affiliated assignee,” which has the effect of facilitating
reorganization by registry operator without triggering a
[consent] right of ICANN. Additionally, the revision also clarifies
that the affiliated assignee’s assumptions of the obligation
under the Registry Agreement must be made in writing.
The Exhibit A of Approved Services proposed revisions are as
follows: Item 1.1.1 to 1.1.5 to reflect the ICANN’s current practice
of describing DNS services in existing Exhibit A in Item 1.1.6,
1.1.7, and 1.2, we add clarification to the DNS classes
permissible and added permission to use TXT and Type 65-534
records in certain circumstances.

Page 5 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

Spec 3, we proposed a revision clarified [fields] in transaction
and activity report.
Spec 4.2.1.5, Use of Data by User section, we’re proposing a
revision that reflects harmonization of provisions with the CZDS
terms of service.
Specification 6.1.4 concerning IDN we proposed revision
intending to capture a circumstances where the provision of the
Exhibit A may conflict with IDN guidelines in the future and
provide priority to the ICANN IDN guidelines.
Spec 7 Section 1, Rights Protection Mechanisms, we’re
proposing a revision clarifying that registry operator must enter
into a Registry-Registrar Agreement with at least one ICANN
accredited registrar and specify the timing related thereto.
Spec 13, we’re proposing a revision in response to the request by
.brand TLD operators and provides that global amendments,
example amendment approved pursuant to Section 7.6 or 7.7 of
the Registry Agreement, that we cannot amend the provision of
Specification 13 unless such amendments are approved by
.brand TLD registry operators.
Those were the summary of revisions, and we’ll look at public
comment period.

Page 6 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

So 31st of May, ICANN notified all registry operator that the
public comment period for the proposed amendment was open.
And Section 7.7 of the Registry Agreement states that the
proposed amendment will be published for a minimum of 30
days. However, ICANN has extended that period to 43 days.
Once the public comment period ends, ICANN and RySG Working
Group will consider the comments submitted and then submit a
final proposal to all registry operators and the ICANN Board for a
vote. Now, please note that the comments received, which do
not pertain to the proposed amendment will not be considered.
If the amendment receives ICANN Board approval and the
registry operator approval, it will become effective 60 days after
ICANN sends legal notice to the registry operator. All members of
the ICANN community are invited and encouraged to provide
feedback. Public comment period ends 13 July 2016, so please
go ahead and submit your comment to our public comment.
Let’s look at the milestones.
So the public comment period opened on 31 May, right? It ends
on the 13 July, and we will be providing a report on 12 August.
Following that, we will request registry operator for a
vote/approval and approval request to the ICANN Board. Once
that’s approved, then amendment will become effective upon 30
days’ notice from ICANN.

Page 7 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

Here is a list of helpful links, and these slides will be posted
online as with all of our other ICANN presentation.
Let’s get to your questions and answers so we’re ready.
Anybody? Go ahead, please.

REG LEVY:

Reg Levy, Minds + Machines. Is a fax number still a requirement
under this, just in general? There are a number of instances
where I’ve been required to provide a fax number. Given the
realities of current technology, that fax number just goes to an email address. I know ICANN also doesn’t have a physical fax
number, so it strikes me it’s very odd that it’s a requirement. It is
fine to have it as an option.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thanks, Reg. Are you talking about when you’re providing
contact information in the portal, or are you talking about
something in the Registry Agreement or both?

REG LEVY:

Both. It’s my understanding that the requirement in the portal
stems from the actual contract.

Page 8 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

KRISTA PAPAC:

EN

So it doesn’t really tie to the contract the requirement for the
portal and with fax numbers, my recollection (and I’m working a
little bit from my memory here) there are certain types of
contacts that we do ask for a fax number and, while I know it
seems very outdated, there are certain parts of the world where
fax tends to be our most successful way of getting in touch with
them.
It’s one of those things where you can’t make it required for
some and not for others, so it’s more of an operational thing
than a registry agreement thing. In cases like emergency contact
or certain types of contacts, I plan to continue to still require a
fax, but I’m happy to discuss that further with you if you’d like.

DENNIS CHANG:

Do you have a question, Edmond? Go ahead.

EDMOND CHUNG:

Just a comment on one of the points that was presented. On the
Exhibit A and Specification 6 on the IDNs, just a slight
clarification. Not necessarily any conflicts with the future IDN
guidelines but also potential conflict with the current IDN
guidelines, so I just want to make sure that that is covered.

Page 9 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

Well, there have been cases where it has been identified that
there are conflicts between Exhibit A and the current IDN
guidelines, and this amendment addresses that issue as well.

DENNIS CHANG:

Thank you, Edmond. Next question. Go ahead.

DENISE MICHEL:

Denise Michel, Facebook. I’m here on behalf of the business
constituency. Could you and/or the panel members give us
some more background on the impetus for these particular
amendments, how the group of amendments were arrived at,
and if there were additional amendments that the group
considered but did not include?

CYRUS NAMAZI:

Thank you, Denise. This has been a lengthy process, actually, as
you saw from the presentation earlier. I think we’re coming up to
two-year anniversary of when the Stakeholder Group noticed to
ICANN with the intent to propose modifications to it.
It started off with a fairly lengthy list of proposed revisions and,
over the course of 18-20 months that we were engaged with the
Stakeholder Group Working Group, the list was modified. I think

Page 10 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

it was shortened considerably. I know that Jon and Susan
comment on that as well.
And, at least from my perspective, overall, it ended up being
more of a clarification and clean up of language. This was sort of
the Draft 1.0 that we all agreed to back in 2013. Not too much
substantive issues ended up being a part of it.
I’ll let the representatives from the Working Group also
comment on it if you like.

JON NEVETT:

Sure. Great question, Denise. Yeah, we started this process in
July of 2014, and now we’re almost at the end of June 2016, so
it’s been literally two years. We each had a list of proposed
changes that we wanted to discuss. And as per the terms of the
Registry Agreement, that’s a process that we notify them that we
want to discuss changes. They notify us that they want to
discuss changes. We just did it together. They shared a list with
us. We shared a list with them.
I won’t say a lengthy list, but there were a number of items on
those lists from two years ago. And they got whittled down
because you need agreement of both parties. So if we didn’t
agree, they dropped it; and if they didn’t agree, we have to drop
it, and that’s why we got down to list of more clarifications.

Page 11 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

There are some substantive changes in here that we think are
helpful and clarifications that we think are helpful, but the list of
issues that we didn’t deal with is larger than the list of issues
that we dealt with.

SUSAN PAYNE:

Just to add, I suppose that in terms of the list of requirements
from the registry side, we basically just discussed it within the
Registry Stakeholder Group. So there was a sort of initial call to
the list of, what do you think? Do you think we should set this in
motion? And those who were interested then participated in a
working group, all submitting their suggested issues for
negotiation and we ended up with a fairly substantive
spreadsheet of issues and amendments we wanted to talk
about, which we then swapped with the ICANN staff and worked
from there.

CYRUS NAMAZI:

One additional point and it goes to Reg’s question before. It’s
been a while since we actually exchanged the list of items. New
ones have come up and people have had some new ideas that
we haven’t dealt with because we kind of closed the queue in a
way probably about three or four months ago, probably even
more, six months.

Page 12 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

And so the question for the Stakeholder Group in the next few
meetings is, should we kick this process off again and start
dealing with the pent-up demand for other changes? That
sounds like a little frightening, and I’m hearing internal screams
from the folks over here.
So that’s something we need to decide: are the changes that we
haven’t dealt with that might go through this process with some
success worth the pain of going through it again? Hopefully, it
won’t be two years but maybe another year of negotiations in
doing this public comment and changing all the agreements and
publishing everything.
So that’s something we need to consider.

KATRIN OHLMER:

One follow-up to Reg question about the fax number and CZDS.
Is it still mandatory or voluntarily? I think there have been some
confusion whether the fax number has to be provided and CZDS
inquiries.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thanks, Katrin. I know I think there’s already a comment in the
public comment form about this as well, and that’s something
we’ll take into consideration as we’re evaluating the comments
and thinking through the earlier point I made about fax number

Page 13 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

is sometimes the best way to get a hold of people, which could
be useful to registries or maybe not.
But I know there’s a public comment already about that. Please
feel free to also submit your own comments on that, and we’ll
definitely consider that when we’re reviewing comments. Thank
you.

DENNIS CHANG:

Go ahead.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Yeah. I’d appreciate hearing some more background on the
changes to 2.10 and 6.7. Why were they done? What do they
mean?

JON NEVETT:

I’m happy to take those. You asked about 2.10 and 6.7. I’ll go
with 2.10 first. That’s pricing for registry services. The registry
has to provide its customers, the registrars, notice of any kind of
price change. The notice depends whether it’s going up, going
down, so there are different notices.
What we did in the original agreement back in 2013, is that
ICANN would also get a copy of any notices. And we’ve been
doing it, so if we change the price of one domain name, we have

Page 14 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

to notify ICANN and there’s nothing that they do with it. They’re
just – it goes into some holding pattern, I guess.
And so they weren’t doing anything with it, and it was a pain for
us to send it to them as well. The registrars get notice, so if
there’s a problem on the registrar perspective, they’ll raise it to
ICANN anyway. So it was just an administrative burden for both
us as registries and ICANN, and it wasn’t providing any value, so
we cut out the notice to ICANN.
Again, the registrars get notice and, to the extent a registry is
ever accused of not following the process or having some issue
with the price change or an increase or something like that, they
will notify ICANN immediately. That’s what the registrar would
know to do. And having notices from a thousand registries of
different price adjustments didn’t make sense from an ICANN
perspective.
So that’s the genesis to that one. Rubens, do you have
something to add?

RUBENS KUHL:

Yes. Just on that, ICANN already doesn’t receive information on
the initial pricing, so that only applies to prices that are being
changed. So that was also an asymmetry that we wanted to fix.

Page 15 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

EN

Thanks. That’s a useful point. What’s the rationale in ICANN
receiving price changes but not initial pricing? Does anyone
know?

RUBENS KUHL:

No, that’s why we are proposing that.

JON NEVETT:

It was just a disjoint in the original drafting of the agreement, in
my opinion. Okay, 6.7 is probably a longer story. The genesis of
this one, this is a Fee Reduction Waiver. We had discussed actual
reductions in fees when we first started, and we had other
proposals in there from a registry perspective that all got
whittled down.
The issue for a Fee Reduction Waiver is to align the registries
with the registrars. So for example, the Registrar Accreditation
Agreement doesn’t have the $0.18 transaction fee in their
agreement and because of that, it used to be $0.25 and went
down to $0.22 if you did certain things, went down to $0.20.
So the registrars were able to negotiate different price changes,
depending on volume of names and other factors as part of the
budget cycle. Because the $0.25 fee is in the Registry Agreement
itself, any kind of reduction would have to go through a full
contract amendment.

Page 16 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

And so the proposed provision is in there to deal with that
situation that if there’s an explosion of new top-level domain
registrations and ICANN’s budget is exploded and they want to
have a waiver, we don’t have to go through the two-year process
of amending the contract. We could just do it as part of a budget
process.
We had asked for some more language in there related to
transparency and discrimination so that it’s not – we didn’t want
any perception that ICANN could just play favorites and say, “We
like you, so we’re going to low your fees but no one else’s based
on the provision.” I’ve heard some of those concerns in the
registry-registrar call we had last week, and that’s not the intent.
ICANN’s position was, “We have accountability and transparency
requirements. We don’t need to spell it out in this provision even
though we asked for it,” so they cut that out and so that was
their position.
We envision any use of this to be objective, public, and obviously
transparent, so that was the goal and the genesis of this Fee
Reduction Waiver.

DENNIS CHANG:

Any other questions, comments? Anybody behind that
[inaudible] there?

Page 17 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Where’s the coffee?

DENNIS CHANG:

We did have a webinar on this earlier, and that may be why there
is less questions at this forum and that’s okay. We do have the
public comments period still open, another 15 days, so please go
ahead and provide your feedback there.
Unless there’s any – okay, we have one more.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Two.

DENNIS CHANG:

Two?

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Hello. [inaudible] France. Maybe I didn’t understand all the
details about the Specification 13 part about the votes. Are there
any special completely detailed roles on the votes of how do you
define it’s been accepted by the [branches’] registries?

Page 18 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

SUSAN PAYNE:

EN

I’ll try. Actually, I’m going to call out the contract just to be sure I
look at the right thing. Basically, what the current contract has is
a provision that everyone who has clauses 7.6 and 7.7 in their
contract, effectively every single registry votes on all changes.
And what we were concerned about was that you could have a
theoretical situation where you might be an open registry
without Specification 13, but you would be voting on a change
to Specification 13 that wasn’t in your contract.
And this certainly seemed to us to be (certainly seemed to me to
be) a not intended consequence of the way that Specification 13
developed and was sort of inserted into the contracts 2 years
ago, 18 months ago.
The amendment is to address that so that there is a provision
now, which says that if it’s an amendment proposed under this
collective

negotiation

process

for

an

amendment

to

Specification 13, then you need to be one of the registries that
has it in your contract to vote through the change.
And specifically, the voting is still – the same kind of criteria has
been applied. So there’s a two-stage qualification for the voting.
First of all, there’s a voting based on one vote per TLD, and then
there’s a safeguard, which is related to the amount of fees paid
to ICANN. And effectively, the amount of fees you pay to ICANN

Page 19 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

depends on the number of domains you have under
management.
Now, personally, I don’t feel that that’s necessary to stage voting
for a brand registry because the number of domains you have
and the fees you pay to ICANN is not really the priority of the
brand registry. And the value of the brand registry to you, you
might have one name but it doesn’t mean it’s not valuable to
you.
But nonetheless, that is what’s been proposed. The idea, as I
say, is that you vote if you’ve got the provision in your contract,
so you are voting for an amendment that actually affects you.
The other thing to just mention is that ICANN’s staff were very
concerned that there shouldn’t be unfair treatment and,
therefore, there is also a kind of veto from the open registries.
Cyrus is smiling. This was the subject of a lot of negotiation and
debates, and they felt that it was appropriate that open
registries, even though they don’t have Specification 13, should
be able to say, “I know all of you guys have voted yes, but we
think this is inappropriate and so we are voting no.”
There is a veto in there from all registries if they don’t agree with
the change. Yeah, I hope – does that help?

Page 20 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

FRANCISCO ARIAS:

EN

Yeah, that helps. So, just to summarize, if someone wants to
make a change to Specification 13, it’s only the people who have
that would vote. Am I too simple?

SUSAN PAYNE:

Effectively, yes.

FRANCISCO ARIAS:

Okay. Thank you.

SUSAN PAYNE:

So, just to make sure I get this correct, both vote, but it doesn’t
pass for the Spec 13 provisions unless the second threshold for
those with Spec 13 is also achieved.
And then, just one clarification, which is probably obvious but I
try not to assume, too often things are obvious. This is a
proposed provision for these proposed amendments, this
provision would not be incorporated, just be the single vote this
time around and if it was included, if this amendment was inked
for a lack of a better word, that would be in there for future votes
or future amendments.

[BRETT FOSTER]:

I have a couple of mechanical questions about the process
forward from here. At the end of the public comment period,

Page 21 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

assuming that everyone agrees that changes should be made,
when would those changes going to affect and then how would
they go into effect? Will the base agreement just be deemed
amended by this process? Will we have to re-sign an
amendment? Just mechanically, will you send something out to
us, or how will that take effect?

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thanks, [Brett]. Before that point, after public comments,
summary and analysis report, we also work with the Working
Group on looking at the public comments. This is all spelled out
in the agreement but just for the benefit for everyone. I know
Dennis covered this earlier.
An amendment needs to be approved by the vote of the
registries, which has two thresholds to cross. It has to be
approved by the Board. And then, once all of that happens, the
way we’re anticipating implementing this – and it’s in the public
comment forum. I know there’s a lot of very dense documents
there.
But the way we’d like to implement it is with a global
amendment, which basically summarizes what each of the
changes are. That global amendment would be sent out to each
affected party, contracted registry operator that’s affected by it,
that has this amendment provision in their contract.

Page 22 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

So that’s new 2012-round gTLDs, as well as some of the legacies
who now have this provision. Nothing needs to be signed, which
is really awesome because that’s pretty laborious definitely for
ICANN and certainly for those that have portfolios of TLDs.
I think that it’s a 60-day – you’d get a legal notification from us
with the global amendment saying that it’s effective in 60 days,
and then we go from there.

JON NEVETT:

If I could add one thing. I don’t know if you’re on the webinar on
– when was it? A week or two ago when we discussed this one
issue that is open and that Krista referred to as being discussed I
guess is what will ICANN show on the website in the resource
section for our Registry Agreements? Will it be the old Registry
Agreement and then there’ll be a click to the amendment that
changes that, or will we have essentially an amended and
restated version up on the website so you have the current
version? And that’s still an open issue.
It’s an administrative hustle for these guys to go through all the
contracts and put all the changes in to each one. But it would be
great if that happened because then when you click on your
contract, you actually see your contract. You don’t have to cross
reference any additional amendment to say, “Oh, what does
Provision 75 say?” and you pull up Provision 75 and you have

Page 23 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

actually the wrong provision because it has been amended and
you’re not cross referencing it.
So that’s an open issue that’s being discussed certainly
internally at ICANN.

KRISTA PAPAC:

And if I can just follow-up on that. Thanks, Jon. So the way that
amendments are today, for anyone who’s amended their
agreement, you might know this. They work very similar to this,
only there are signatures required.
The way that all of the agreements are set up if you go look at
your Registry Agreement page 9or pages if you have multiple
TLDs0, you have the base agreement that you signed, any
subsequent amendments, two character authorizations. It
shows the history of everything.
I’m not a lawyer, but the way that I understand it from our legal
counsel to the way that our contract is written, it’s meant to be
amended and this process is meant to deliver an amendment
rather than perform a restated agreement.
And to Jon’s point, not just an administrative burden but the
human error factor is also – all of your agreements are very, very
different. These amendments – so you have different Spec 11
provisions, you have different Exhibit As, you’ve made notice

Page 24 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

changes to your 7.9 contact information. Just those are the
things that come right off the top of my head right now. The
human error factor of trying to restate those is a bit problematic
as well.
The other thing I wanted to make sure, I didn’t mention earlier,
is the other thing that we would publish at the top of the
Registry Agreement pages we have what’s the current base
agreement, which is just the generic version of the base
agreement. We would also add the global amendment there, as
well as I believe we envision putting a redline of this new base
agreement against the old base agreement so you could see
what the standard base looks like in a redline form that might
make it a little bit easier to decipher.
But to Jon’s point, we are still discussing it.

JON NEVETT:

I wonder if there’s a way that if you pull the agreement up, any
provision that’s been amended is highlighted or something like
that. I wonder if there’s an easy way to put that in. So you know
7.5 was amended. You pull up your contract, and you see it’s
highlighted or something. You don’t see the new language but at
least there’s, “Alert! Alert! Don’t rely on this provision because
it’s been amended subsequently.”

Page 25 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

Maybe there’s something we could look at it and do something
like that or something. Krista doesn’t like it. You want to play
poker with Krista.

KRISTA PAPAC:

And that’s what I want you to think. Success. I completely
appreciate where you’re coming from. One of the reasons that I
think we took this global amendment approach is to make that –
it looks a little bit like the chart of changes so you can – if you
look at the amendments you guys have today, it has
wheretofores and whereas’s and a whole bunch of stuff that
leads in it says, “We take this out and we replace this.” That’s
actually much more difficult to follow than – it’s almost a chart.
The global amendment itself is almost a chart of the changes.
It’s not exactly what you’re talking – but we’re trying to get there
is what I’m saying as we’re looking for the most useful but
manageable solution. So, anyway, thank you, and we will keep
talking with my poker face.

DENNIS CHANG:

Thank you, everyone. We have one more question.

JIM PRENDERGAST:

Sorry. We can’t get out of here that quick. Jim Prendergast, The
Galway Strategy Group. This is a slightly different take on what

Page 26 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

[Brett] said because I think you said, “Well, assuming everybody
is okay with these changes.” If you look at the comment period
right now, there are comments that are suggesting alternative
paths to what’s in the amendment. Could you give a little more
insight into what happens when you do have comments that are
critical or suggesting something else? How is that going to be
resolved? What’s the process there?

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thanks, Jim. Are you guys sick of my voice yet? This is the first
time we’re doing this. But overall, the way the negotiation
process is articulated in the contract is there basically has a to
be agreement between the Working Group from Registry
Stakeholder Group and from the registries and ICANN in order
for the changes to be deemed okay or whatever. We have to
have agreement.
The way I believe we’re envisioning this is taking the public
comments. And again, there’s a provision in there also that talks
about working with the Working Group staff and the Working
Group through the public comments.
Our best current thinking is that through that conversation, we
come to some place that we’re in agreement. And then again, it
would go to a vote from the registry operators. So all registries

Page 27 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

have to agree to it and approve it under the contract, and then
again, the Board also has an approval step.

JIM PRENDERGAST:

So then, just to follow up, essentially, if somebody is
recommending that where ICANN is dropped from the price
notification and say somebody is advocating that that shouldn’t
be dropped, then the negotiating team and ICANN will get
together, discuss whether or not you accept that edit or not, and
then it goes forward to a vote to the registry stakeholder or the
registries.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Yeah, I believe so.

JIM PRENDERGAST:

Okay.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thank you.

JON NEVETT:

There are four comments so far. There’s one in that 6.7 [and]
[inaudible][.7]. That comment was more along the lines of it
should be changed, not dropped. But yeah, I think the process-

Page 28 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

wise that’s right, Jim. We’ll get together after and look at it. If
there’s an overwhelming outcry about a provision, then
obviously we’ll have to take that into account and decide what
to do about that one.

JIM PRENDERGAST:

Yeah, I’m just trying to anticipate the flood of comments on July
12th.

DENNIS CHANG:

Go ahead, Keith.

KEITH DRAZEK:

Thank you very much. Keith Drazek, Verisign and Registry
Stakeholder Group. I apologize for asking this question here in
this session and not previously in the various discussions, but in
Exhibit A in I think it’s Section 1.2 of Exhibit A, there’s a reference
to dotless domains. And while appropriately, I think it actually
confirms that dotless domains are prohibited in the New gTLDs –
something that the ICANN Board resolved back in 2013 – there’s
some new language around the introduction of the use of an
RSEP by a registry operator to seek I guess a waiver or
permission to be able to use dotless domains. It seems that that
might be a possible circumvention of the ICANN Board’s position
on that.

Page 29 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

And there is no explanation or rationale included as to why that
language was included or added. I was just hoping that we could
get a little bit more clarification about how that got in there,
what the intent was, where it came from. That will be helpful.
Thanks.

FRANCISCO ARIAS:

This is [an unfortunate] administrative way to present things I
guess because this is not new language. What happened is, for
reasons that escape my memory, the base agreement as it is
published does not contain Section 1 of Exhibit A. I honestly
can’t remember why. It was three years ago or two whatever it
is.
The point is Section 1 is that [inaudible] includes that specific
language without change. It is in all the New TLD agreements
and even in some of the legacy TLDs that have adopted this new
form of agreement. There are indeed some changes related to
Section 1 of Exhibit A, but they are not about dotless.
So that language that you have there is indeed permitting
dotless. It didn’t mention RSEP because, as far as I understand,
even if we didn’t mention it, every registry, it’s as far as I
understand, is entitled to request a change to their services. And
whether that will pass an RSEP for example, that’s a different
question.

Page 30 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

JON NEVETT:

EN

Thank you. Just to follow-up then. Thank you, Francisco. I’ll
have to go back and take a look at the previous language just to
confirm my understanding. But it seems to me that if we’re
looking at something like dotless domains specifically – and I’m
not addressing some of the other records that were addressed in
that session, but dotless domains was specifically prohibited by
the ICANN Board – that the appropriate place to reference
dotless domains in the New gTLD Registry Agreement would be
in Section 2.2 or something similar to the prohibition on
wildcarding.
The idea that there might be a submission of an RSEP to seek
approval of something that has been explicitly prohibited by the
ICANN Board, it seems much more I guess comparable to
Section 2.2, which is the prohibition on wildcarding. Not
allowing for a registry to submit a proposal, an RSEP proposal,
which would have I think a much lower threshold of community
input and review and Board consideration potentially than
something that might require a change to a Board resolution.
Thanks.

Page 31 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

CYRUS NAMAZI:

EN

Thank you, Keith. That’s a good input. I think we should go back
and take a look at it to make sure that the intent here is reflected
in what’s posted and ultimately adopted.
I just want to make sure for the record that there is no
implication here of ICANN and perhaps the Stakeholder Group
wanting to provide a backdoor for dotless domain to come back.
There’s no intention of that at all. I just wanted to state that for
the record.
How the redline is presented perhaps may have given rise to that
perception. Now again, I also want to echo what Francisco said,
which is in terms of any registries being able to submit an RSEP
to ICANN for any type of service they want to, they can. There’s
no way that we could tell them not to.
How we end up processing it and ultimately approving or
disapproving it then falls into that category.

JON NEVETT:

So the bottom line is this language is in the current agreements
anyway, so it’s not a change.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

Page 32 of 36

That’s right.

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

JON NEVETT:

Okay. Thank you.

DENNIS CHANG:

Go ahead, Edmond.

EDMOND CHUNG:

Just a comment on that actually from Francisco. In terms of
Exhibit A, I think one of the reasons why a few years back it
wasn’t included is the intention or what was advertised at that
time was that it would just reflect what was in the application
and it should reference back the approved services based on the
application and the PDT and those kind of things and, therefore,
it was left blank. And then, subsequently, the language was
produced and I guess that led to all this further discussion in this
particular round.
And then, a couple of comments. One on the kind of effective
agreement, which Jon mentioned. I understand the difficulty
that Krista mentioned about the human errors that may be
produced if we create an integrated version of a contract. But I
think some thinking towards that might be really useful because
with the amendments piling up or as they increase over time, it
would be useful to have a version – even if you say that version is
not the definitive version and if there’s any error, go back to the
amendments and the original one – that would be useful for

Page 33 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

reference just to read through for registries and other people
who are trying to read through the agreement. You can have a
disclaimer that says, “This version is not the definitive version
but just for reference.”
And then, a third comment on Jon’s point about if we do the
next round of amendments, we’re probably are looking at even
more complications with the older TLDs coming back into this
format. And so I wouldn’t expect a shorter time to go through. It
would be very optimistic to think about it being shorter than
what we did this time.

KRISTA PAPAC:

Thanks, Edmond. On your point about having an unofficial
version of a pro forma agreement – and we have heard you guys
on this going back even to the webinar and the discussion there
– one of the things we’re looking into (and I cannot promise you
this in any way, shape or form today, I cannot promise you this
but we are looking into it) is to see with – you guys all know
we’re working on sort of reconfiguring the GDD Portal. One of
the things I’d love to get to is something like that either through
the portal or through some other type of technology. It’s very
preliminary stages because we just started talking about it
based on the webinar.

Page 34 of 36

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

EN

The point is we’re trying to see if there’s some way that you
could produce something like that through technology that is
part of your portal or some other thing. If we get there, great.
We’d like to get there, but we’re definitely looking into it, having
heard your guys’ feedback and your concerns.

DENNIS CHANG:

All right, then. I think that’s the end of those questions, so we
will go ahead and close this session. Thank you everyone for
coming and participating, and we’ll see you again on another
meeting.

UNIDENTIFIED MALE:

[Inaudible].

KRISTA PAPAC:

Sorry. Really quick, I just wanted to thank Susan, Rubens, and
Jon, of course, the ICANN staff folks but especially you guys for
participating in this. And again, we really appreciate the
collaboration and teamwork, so thanks.

JON NEVETT:

Page 35 of 36

Thank you.

HELSINKI – Discussion of the Proposed Amendments to the Base New gTLD Registry Agreement

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 36 of 36

EN

