HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)
Wednesday, June 29, 2016 – 13:30 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

PETER:

All right. Good afternoon everyone. Sure there are still many
more people on their way, but while they’re getting in, we’re
going to get started. First session is an update from the regional
organizations. And we hope to share some ideas and projects
that can be applied across the regions, or at least provide you
with some pointers that can help you and identify people within
the relevant regional organization that is working on something
that might be of interest to you.
So, Kim, I don’t know which presentation is up first. Barrack?
Barrack, the floor is yours. [AFTLD?].

BARRACK OTIENO:

Thank you Peter. Next slide please.
Okay. So, I have very brief presentation on the African region.
My name is Barrack Otieno, the General Manager for Africa Top
Level Domains organization. We had our General Assembly in

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

Botswana, last month, as from 29th May to 3rd June, during what
we refer to as the African Internet Summit.
And during the meeting, a new team was elected to lead the
AFTLD region. We’ve also seen a marked increase in the number
of ccTLDs that are keen to join the regional organization.
Secondly, I’ll give an update on some of the key projects in the
Africa region, and then of course, I will make concluding
remarks.
So this is the new Board of Africa Top Level Domains
Organization. We have Dr. Alex [inaudible] from Senegal, who is
the new chairman, he is the administrative contact of dot SN.
We have Ali [inaudible] from [inaudible], he’s a member of our
security TLD ops committee from dot KM, who is the vicechairman or president. We have Mrs. [inaudible], from Tunisia,
dot TN, who is our new treasurer.
We retained, we still have [inaudible], who is on the ccNSO as
one of the directors. Then we have Nicholas [inaudible] from
Madagascar, and [inaudible] as well Malawi represented on the
Board. So those are the new changes, I communicated the same
on the ccNSO community list. We recently had our General
Assembly in training for registry staff, attended by 30
participants from 15 countries.

Page 2 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

With the support of ICANN and the Internet Society. The next
training is going to be in Senegal, we are working on a train the
trainers program, with the support of ICANN, to build capacity
within the African continent. We’ve been relying a lot on the
network setup resource center, but we are in the process of
building local capacity and we are seeing this trickling in the
number of ccTLDs that are actually getting automated and
supporting each other at regional level.
Then at the end of the year, of course, we have a security course
as well in Khartoum, Sudan in November. So some of our main
activities of focus areas are listed on the presentation, to
facilitate implementation of registry automation and improve
operational sustainability of the registry services for at least 50%
of the ccTLDs identified through needs assessment by 2020. So
as we speak, at least 60% of our ccTLDs are automated and
walking towards sustainability. We’ve had a massive challenge
due to the nature of challenges across the different African
countries, but we’ve learned a lot from our sister organizations,
CENTR, APTLD, LACTLD.
We’ve picked some of the ideas being implemented in the
region, and we’ve implemented this. I’m also happy to report
that some of the members of the other regions have been very
helpful to us. During our last African domain name system

Page 3 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

forum, we had our colleagues from CENTR, APTLD, and LACTLD
come and share ideas on marketing and sustainability in ccTLDs.
And this has gone a long way in helping in the way our ccTLDs
operate. But more specifically, we are looking at having at least
90% of all of our ccTLDs automated by 2020. We still have a
couple of challenges that are beyond the remit of the regional
organization, because some of them are political in nature, but
we are finding ways of going around these challenges.
We… Most of our ccTLDs are actively participating within the
ICANN and ccNSO ecosystem. And we’ve been given a challenge
by the ccNSO to ensure that more and more are involved, and I
think it’s a welcome challenge to us. We do hope that by 2020,
we’ll have 90% of them, at least, participating actively and
substantially within the ccNSO.
We still have a challenge with getting proper statistics and better
in our region, but this is something that we are working on. And
I know that CENTR is leading the way in this, and we are really
going to count a lot on our partnership with them, so that we
can [inaudible] better in statistics on ccTLDs in the African
region, but the market is open. And the market is ready.
And we invite, in particular, registrars to just come in and assist
us in the area of business development. We are also working on
governance. A lot of our ccTLDs are now being managed by

Page 4 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

regulators, which is a new challenge for us. So, also, a lot of the
regulators are in this particular ICANN meeting. They’ve been
coming just to learn how we can be able to have a right balance
between the regulators and the business communities in the
running, the ccTLDs.
Some of them, the regulators are, the administrative contact,
then you find the private sector organization as the technical
contact. So we are having very interesting models that are being
tested, and we are happy to receive a lot of new ideas from
ccTLDs that are practicing this here. So that’s it from our region.
Thank you Peter.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Any questions for Barrack?
Okay. Thank you.
Thanks, and the next one?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
All right.
Can we go a couple of slides?
Yeah, let’s start with this one. Okay, quick update from CENTR. I
wanted to focus on three points. First of all, we have rebranded
CENTR from the, I would say, very powerful but a bit annoying,

Page 5 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

all read across every page, every [inaudible], every map, every
picture, to slightly modern and up to date approach.
The one to thank for that is Alex, she’s at the back of the room.
Hey Alex. Alex is CENTR’s communication manager. I’m sure
that you’ve already met her. Probably more important in a
sense of usability for members, is that our new website is not
just softer on the eye, but it’s a much better tool.
We had a complex website in the past. It had been up and
running for just under eight years, but it was getting very hard to
find what you were looking for. The new website should change
that. So, I invite you to test it and let us know what you think, let
Alex in particular know what you think, Alex at CENTR dot ORG.
But you should be able to find [inaudible] the things that, even
as non-members, I hope you benefit from such as, the reports
from ICANN such as the ICANN pre-guides, where we help you
and some of your constituents to find your way across the ICANN
meetings.
There are reports from ITF that we do in collaboration with
LACTLD, and plenty of other stuff that you might find helpful,
including news and policy updates. So feel free to have a look
and let us know what you think. Second thing I wanted to
mentioned, I’m sorry, Kim, but the pointer doesn’t seem to work.
Thanks.

Page 6 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

Is we’re working on a registrar portal. A quick background to
that is, CENTR has now had two meetings with registrars. We
called them the CENTR Registrar Days. And they’re taking place
the day before General Assembly. We’ve had one in 2014, one in
2015, and the next one is planned for the meeting in Belgrade.
That is the 5th of October, if I’m not mistaken. But our new
website should tell you, because it’s on the calendar.
During these registrar days, it was obviously good to exchange
ideas, and views, and problems, but what we like most is that we
ended day with very concrete action items. And one of these
action items was that we kept on hearing from registrars, it was
terribly difficult to figure out which ccTLD had which policy.
There were across 28 different languages in Europe. Thank you.
So they were across different languages in Europe, different
sections on the website, anyways, hard to find for a registrar and
to understand which ccTLD they were allowed to sell an under
what conditions.
In addition to that, we had a similar probably with EPP codes,
registrars that were working with a wide range of ccTLDs, find it
a nightmare to realize which EPP extension works for which
ccTLD, and then there is the problem of the individual flavors
that are added to EPP extensions.

Page 7 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

And so what the registrar portal does is for the CENTR members,
it provides to registrars a one-stop shop, an overview of both
policies, can you register it, yes or no? And EPP codes. Do we
have implemented the extension, yes or no? And if so, what
flavor? Currently running in a beta test phase, getting really
good responses from registrars, and I think it’s a perfect
opportunity to export that across the other regions, and might
find helpful for dealing with your registrars too.
Next slide please, thank you. A last point I wanted to raise, and
this is nothing innovative, and I’m sure it’s not new to most of
you, but we keep running into a problem that basically prevents
us from doing a good job in representing our industry and
advocating some of the technologically neutral positions that
we take in the policy debates, and that is a very simple thing.
People have no clue what they’re talking about. And that is a
scary thing because in Brussels, in particular, every week you
have new policy people starting on their job at the European
Commission, or as an advisory in the European Parliament, and
they will be developing policies that can, and probably will have,
a significant impact on our industry, from privacy, to security, to
standardization.
Standardization seems to be the answer to every single
regulatory problem we have these days. But then when you talk

Page 8 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

to them, and you ask them, or you come up with a couple of
examples and you see a look on their face that makes you realize
they have no idea what the DNS is. They have no idea of what an
IP address is, or why walking doesn’t work.
So we do have a fundamental problem that there is a lack of
understanding on the most basic level of how the internet
works. And so, one thing I just wanted to say to this room is that
that is contrary to what I had been hoping, a couple of years ago,
we’re actually intensifying our efforts to educate people, how
this works and why that is important if you’re willing to write
legislation.
So, just as a type of benchmark for the last year, roughly, we
train just over 200 people from European Commission and
European Parliament. And we have currently only one module,
which we’re hoping to develop, and that one module is internet
basics. So it really starts from the plug in the wall, and two
hours later, with an explanation of the root zone and role of IANA
and how it all fits together.
So we’re going to build more modules. We’re going to make
sure that we can deep dive on a couple of issues. And I’ll keep
you posted. The idea is that we have these modules as a kind of
a wide-label training that CENTR members could then use for
their own purposes. Before you think that it is scary that a

Page 9 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

lawyer tells our people how the internet works, during that
exercise, I’m supported very strongly by some of our tech
experts, and one is in the room, Peter [inaudible] from
[inaudible].
Heartfelt thanks to Peter, and his colleague from DNS BE, Rolo
[inaudible], and Peter [inaudible] from [inaudible], and a couple
of others, that make sure that they allow me to cut a few
corners, at least, everything is factually correct.

So two

questions to the room. Who else is doing training?
I would say on a larger scale, through policy makers or
governments. No one.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
One. All right, one, thank you. And my second question, I think
we can take offline, can we cooperate…? But we’ll discuss that
after this presentation. If anybody is interested to discuss this a
bit more, or can think of partners across regions, because on a
regional level, we have a couple of pretty good potential
partners for fully-developed educational course, but crossregions, I would be very interested in that. Thank you. Any
questions? No.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Page 10 of 50

Can I ask?

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yes, of course.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

I don’t know why we haven’t discussed this before. I was at the
[inaudible] and I didn’t ask you for that, but this is something
really interesting to develop in our region too. And I come from
a place where we did that, and there is a lot of interest in and
good results from building capacity…

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

…all right. Andreas, you’re next.

ANDREAS:

…despite I have been with some places at the ICANN community
in the last 10 years, let’s say, and most of your faces are familiar
to me. I don’t know how long I will have this excuse being new,
but this is my first meeting, and my presentation takes
advantage of that, somehow excuse.

I am really, at this

moment, taken a process where I am having my learning curve,
and I am learning a lot from all of you, and only my, the
members of my organization that [inaudible] but also, as I told,
colleagues of the different regional organizations.

Page 11 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

So I’m really glad to be here.

I am taking stock of what

[Carolina] presented in March in Marrakech, some of our
ongoing efforts, developments, were listed in that presentation.
One of those was related to the creation of the working groups.
This is something that LACTLD has developed since October last
year, when a new strategy definition was adopted by the
organization, which for me, at least, was really great news to
jump into an organization with this clear regional, what is a
strategical approach that differentiates from taking the future
[inaudible] to be right here, right now.
And the working groups was one of the main goals, or one of the
main points in this strategy. So [Carolina] already told this
forum about the terms of reference of these groups that have
been re-adopted and the chairs and vice-chairs that have been
already appointed.

But earlier this year, the proposal for

working groups, the project let’s say, is planned to last at least
two years.
So I list also this… I don’t know if this issue was already
[inaudible], but I also listed that, so the news here is that our
working groups are running, working. They have been in the
involved in the creation and the development, or are being
involved in the developing of the agendas for our workshops. It
happened at… We have a structure that was tabled for some
years now, for our workshops, as you may know, commercial,

Page 12 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

technical, legal, and policy, and we have four working groups in
the same topics.
So each of these working groups are related and contributing in
a bottom up way, to finding which topics are interesting, finding
which approaches or which type of exchanges are the most
useful to do in every workshop. So at the policy workshop in
May, last May, in Cuba, in Havana, the policy working group,
which is very active, met previous to the workshop, met also
inside in Havana and after that, and was involved in the
development of the agenda.
And this was a really successful agenda it was a worship that had
interesting results, that was the only meeting this year that has
already done, but the policy worship is also involved in the
LACTLD [inaudible] similar to EuroDIG, it’s our regional Latin
American Caribbean initiative.

LACTLD was involved in this

process for many years, but part of the MAG, or the [inaudible]
committee now, our community is trying to have a collective
approach to that type of forum.
The technical working groups and the commercial working
groups…

Page 13 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

ANDREAS:

EN

…in defining the agenda in, in a more individual way from our
side, but for me, it’s really useful to interact with our colleagues
in the development of this agenda, in these agendas. The legal
working group is also taking shape more slowly, but they are
also there. There is also a point regarding my transition, it has
been really smooth. I need to stand out the role of the previous,
my [inaudible] in this position was really dedicated to help me to
jump into the task in the middle of the year, actually.
I had something that was a luxury for me, a two-week period of
adjustment. We were sharing roles with [Carolina] and that was
really a helpful moment for me. So then I started trying to gain
experience from our communities, and I participated in
[inaudible] events, like the ITF in Argentina, I am based in
Argentina actually. The [inaudible] last month, and the I-STAR
meeting with I-STAR organizations, and also I have been
continuing with [inaudible] the seats of LACTLD at the
[inaudible].
I have also taken part of this study that LACTLD is doing, the DNS
marketplace in Latin America and the Caribbean, I am, let’s say I
am member of that team also that other colleagues are leading.
I am just trying to learn there more than contributing. But this
will make my [inaudible] much better. Also I have been working
with the [Any Cast?] cloud project.

Page 14 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

This is something that, I put this item in the transition because
it’s something that I need to understand which are our goals
here, but it’s also noted in other parts of our this presentation
actually. In Cuba, also we have our General Assembly. We had it
two months ago, actually.

This was the policy workshop

together with the General Assembly, the main General Assembly,
because it was the one that, new authority for our organization.
We have two, but one is the more critical General Assembly. And
the [inaudible] was together with LACNIC and [LAC IX], the three
organizations coming and joining together. Our fiscal balances
were approved, and this year we had a really, we a different
approach because we had two independent audits, because the
independent audit that was conducted this year for the three
first months of this year, was concurrent with the pending of the
term of the previous year, general manager.
So our General Assembly approved all of the fiscal and financial
aspects of the previous term, of [Carolina’s] term, and that was
something really interesting to start in this situation, because
the organization now is organized financially, but the history
was not always that. So it’s important to [stand out?] that,
LACTLD Board has had some renewal, also, for [inaudible], from
Brazil, from dot BR, was reappointed for a three-year term, like
every member of the Board has a three-year term.

Page 15 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

So [Frederico] will come back for a few more years. We also
have the challenge to cover the position of [inaudible] from dot
AR, that ended his position at dot AR, so he had to step down
from the Board and [inaudible] from Paraguay, from dot PY, was
the one that was selected by the community.
Also the fiscal commission was renewed for three years. The
three members of the fiscal commission were appointed,
[inaudible] from Costa Rica, [inaudible] from Uruguay, and
[inaudible] from Puerto Rico, it [inaudible] that it’s North
America, the region, we can say that it’s in the Caribbean from,
for us, it’s the Caribbean region also. And they are members, not
only members for LACTLD, but they are also in our leadership
this time.
Oscar [inaudible] is part of our fiscal commission, and this has a
relationship [inaudible] on what you may have read or heard
about some of the positions the LACTLD Board has taken
regarding meetings in our region. When we say our region, for
us, it’s Panama and Puerto Rico were both part of LACTLD
region.
So this is something that it’s not considered in this presentation,
but I had to know that also. So now the leadership looks like
that. This is not only the three, the two new members of the
Board, but Eduardo, [Lisa], and Sylvia, Eduardo [inaudible] from

Page 16 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

Columbia is the chair, [Lisa] and Silvia from Chile is the secretary
of the Board, Clara [inaudible] from Dominican Republic, she’s
the one that the treasurer of the Board and the two new
members are [Frederico] and [inaudible] from Paraguay, and the
three new members of the fiscal commission [inaudible].
So that is how we look like now with the new, our renewed team.
And also, some of the future developments, taking in account,
not only our calendar, but some of the changes in the team, the
staff we have. We don’t have a great staff, but, so [inaudible]
staff we have at least three people, but this year, we would have
three new people. So we would have not only a replacement of
the general manager, but the two other positions are also new
people.
So it’s not that the staff is bigger, but we are bigger people
adjusting ourselves to these positions. The calendar was similar
to the one that [Carolina] shared. I need to ask that, add that
Havana meeting already took place, that the August meeting will
be together, the technical workshop, the technical workshop of
LACTLD, the normal one, it’s together with the LAC DNS Forum,
that it’s an event that has been taking place together with the
ICANN meetings normally.
And this time, we are doing that in Santo Domingo. Also I added
here, the LAC [inaudible] project where the organization is

Page 17 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

involved. It’s not a project of their organization, but we are
involved there. Also the September meeting, which is not only
our leader workshop, but we are having leader and regulatory
joint meeting with CENTR and with public interest [inaudible] in
Washington, D.C., in September.
I believe the dates need to be corrected. It’s 14th and 15th of
September. So that’s a mistake. Also in September, and this is
news, the LAC [inaudible] meeting in San Jose, in Costa Rica, we
have a DNS activity, a DNS workshop. That is something that
will be organized by LAC TLD with the support of ISOC, so it’s
something that is also in our calendar, and of course, the
marketing workshop was planned for Puerto Rico and will
remain in Puerto Rico this time.
Despite of the ICANN… Yes, Eduardo. Eduardo is reminding me
that, of course, this was planned to do back to back with the
ICANN meeting, and we are now continuing a meeting in Puerto
Rico. Regarding our challenges, we’re having an approach with
a new website. We will develop a new website. This was
something that was coming from the previous definition for this
year, and we will try to incorporate with one of our members
that will help us to develop our new website.
Some of the websites, were already shared in the last
presentation. We’re having interactive part of our website with

Page 18 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

the Wiki, and the working groups are working through that Wiki.
We are also taking note of the [Any Cast] Cloud project. It’s
already taking shape.

The managers of that are already

confirmed. In some moment this year, we will have a collected
signature host managers, and also the MOU is already there.
Some of the other participants of the [inaudible] are being
added, and are also signing their contracts. There has been, at
least what I saw in this [inaudible] is [inaudible] interest for
many members. So the goal is to have, for the end of next year,
and I hope I can achieve this goal, and we can achieve this goal,
to have nodes in 10 countries, or 10 ccTLDs. I hope we also go
beyond the goal.
This is something that I am sure that we can achieve. We will tell
more about this project once we have more developments. So
thank you very much, I am at your disposal, and this is my
contact information.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you so much Andreas. Any questions for Andreas?
Nope. Perfect. Almost right on time ends this session. Thank
you for listening, and please be in touch if you have any followup questions or suggestions. Thanks.

Page 19 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Given that it’s the marketing session, I just want to take a
moment, and I cleared it with the new chair, I did. I’m just… I
just wanted to announce that [Denny?] and I are going to have a
little celebration in the room next door, right next door, and
we’d like to invite all of our friends there after the marketing
session at 3:00.

And we’ll provide some food and some

celebratory cupcakes.
So we’d love to have you join us, just for a couple of moments
over there, at 3:00.
[APPLAUSE]
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

No, this is supposed to be a [inaudible], so if you want to know
why a Dutchman is wearing a Canadian jersey in Helsinki, one
hour from now, you’ll know it all.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Is that [Lea?], please, your mic? It’s on.
Thank you very much. So good afternoon. We are about to start
the marketing session. We have a presentation from dot CN,
taking the ccTLD stands towards the multilingual internet
environment. Also a presentation from [dot DNA?], an update of

Page 20 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

the Domain Name Association. And a presentation from dot CR,
the local market. And we start with dot CN, thank you.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Hello everyone. I’m [Ling?] from CN. I’m very glad to have this
opportunity to share some information of CN, and actually this is
my first time to make presentation on the marketing session.
I’m a little excited.
So, first, I will share some current status of our products and
service, related with domain name. Next. So in this slide, you
can see some numbers, but I think there is some problem that,
on the right upside, there is a missing number, and it makes
more secret. So this number, I will announce that now, dot CN
has almost 20 million now. So that makes us become the
number one ccTLD in the world.
I think the reason that may be because we know that in last two
years, Chinese domain name market become very, very hot. And
a lot of domain name [Westerners?] want in West, dot CN, not
only dot CN domain name, but also dot COM and some new
gTLD domain name. So, I’m not quite sure the reason why there
is a lot of domain name in West, but in China, when some people
say that, I think it maybe make sense because Chinese dot
market in the last two years, is not very good. So maybe is the

Page 21 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

reason why Westerners choose the domain name as another
good choice for investment.
So, let’s look at the dot China. You know, we also have the IDN
ccTLD for dot CN. So we call it dot [foreign language], and also
the right number is missing. And now the current number for
dot [foreign language] is about 50,000, I think. About 500, I’m
sorry. 500,000. So also for IDN, I think the dot [foreign language]
have a good rise for the registration number, and maybe also
because of the investment.
And… I’m sorry?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Okay, I’m sorry. So in this slide here, you can see we have more
than 80 domestic registrars in China.

So most…

A lot of

domestic registrars come from Beijing, [foreign language],
Shanghai, such kind of advanced city in China. And now we have
about 2,000 resellers in China. Next please.
Okay. For the overseas registrars, and dot CN opened oversee
registration about in 2002, and now we have one gateway. The
gateway is a new star. And now we have more than about 40
registrars directly cooperate with C NIC.

And now oversea

registrars come mainly from the Asia-Pacific area, and North

Page 22 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

America, and Europe. So now we are seeking some oversea
registrars, partners in South America and Africa.
So anyone can recommend some kind of partner for us, thank
you very much. Next please. And you know in China, [MIT?] the
Chinese government has some local policy for the domain name
market. So C NIC also provides some kind of registry service and
solutions for such kind of local policies.
And you know in China, we need to do the real name verification
service and domain name verification service. So C NIC provided
such kind of verification service to any registries and registrars
want to do business in China. So if anyone have interest for the
Chinese market, please feel free to contact C NIC. We would like
to provide such kind of free and good quality service to you guys.
Next please.
And for the [inaudible] production service, you know,
[inaudible], he’s a very popular choice, and C NIC also have
about 12 or 15 technical teams, and we keep on researching and
developing for about eight years, and we have in our brand DNS
software and hardware, we called it [inaudible] DNS.
We name it Super DNS, we hope this software and hardware
have a good performance. And now we’ve got performance like
that, so we get more than 10 million QPS per server, if you use as
DNS. So I think it’s much better than the open source DNS

Page 23 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

solutions. So if anyone have interest, please contact me and we
will make some detailed information.
And also for the following IDF Berlin meeting, and there is
another [byte and bytes?], and we will have some lively demo
during this [inaudible]. So anyone interested, please join us.
Next please.
And for this kind of new gTLD service, C NIC is honored is that we
got authorized from ICANN. So C NIC is one of three service
provider in the world, and also C NIC is the [DA] and [RD TPP],
and TMCH service provider in the world. Next please.
Okay. In the [inaudible] section, make some brave introduction
about our current status of domain name business. So in the
next session, I will make a brief introduction about what kind of
application and optimization we do. Next please. So, first we try
to keep on educating the Chinese community, especially about
the IDN and EAI, such kind of UA application. And we also do
some promotion with our registrars partners, and we also do
some publicity. Next please.
In this slide, you can see we try to make the Chinese community,
Chinese users, know the dot [foreign language] works, I mean,
know the IDN works. So we operate with some very famous
radio programs, and TV programs, and we try to, like them, to
use Chinese character dot [inaudible], their website and to show

Page 24 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

information about themselves. And we also try to cooperate
with some applications to make some new applications in CDN
and IDN.
For example, we cooperate with the supermarket, and in the life
bottle picture, you can see there is [foreign language] products,
and we cooperate with this kind of producers, and they use dot
[foreign language] domain names. And use this domain name,
the customers can check the information of the ad products.
Next please.

And we keep on showing and sponsoring in

different international meetings, not only ICANN meeting, but
also [inaudible] meeting and hosting committee. Next please.
So for the IDN, we all know that ICANN has an UASG, and also
think that we need to make more effort on the UA works. So, C
NIC try to optimize the UA applications in China. We cooperated
with [other] providers to make some optimization of CDN. For
example, you know the English dot and the Chinese dot, period,
is different.
But when we try to input Chinese characters, and if we type the
Chinese characters by the input method, when we input the dot,
people got the Chinese dot, but the browsers may be think the
Chinese dot and the English dot are two different characters. So
we try to cooperate with browsers, like the browsers to make the
Chinese ones and the English ones be the same.

Page 25 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

So it can make the Chinese users to very complete to you the
CDN, in the browser by the Chinese input.

And we also

cooperate with the [inaudible] Chinese version, I think maybe
Chinese version [inaudible], and the [inaudible] such kind of
Chinese Twitter to, looks at Chinese domain name at the
hyperlink. And we also cooperate with search engine service to
include the Chinese domain name in themselves. Next please.
And for the EAI C NIC do provide a lot of contribution on this
technology and applications. And we apply for the APAC project
budget to get a project to try to develop EAI in the AP area. And
we also sponsor the post-fix to support the EAI. So now post-fix
can support EAI. And it also works with a Chinese number one
email software provider, Core Mail. And we worked with this
company, and co-test with Microsoft and Google to make sure
the EAI can be used. Next please.
And in this slide, we want to make introduction about our new
idea about the ITI, we call it IDN TRD initiative. We think that,
especially for ccTLD, most services ccTLD registries are
[inaudible] organization. So that means we have not only the
duties to make contribution to the community, but also we have
some resources to do this. So I think we can maybe co-work
together for any TRD has IDN, and we can work together, we can
make some capacity buildings, and education to different local
communities.

Page 26 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

Let the communities know what is the IDN, what is the EIN, and
try to push more software and hardware providers can support
IDN and EAII. So this picture was [inaudible] by, was took by,
two weeks ago, and C NIC provide the internet resources
capacity building program in Beijing. And this is the third time
we had such kind of program.
During the program, we wanted some ccTLD registries and new
gTLD registries in AP area. And we make some share about the
IDN DNSSEC EAI experience. Next please.
And now, we’ve got some interest from different TLDs. You can
see TLD from Taiwan, Thai, and Hong Kong, and Korea, and
Russia, such kind of TLD registries think these ITI make sense
[inaudible]. And now also we got some gTLD registries bot, for
example [inaudible] and dot Asia. So we want… If anyone has
an interest and maybe we can work together and make some
more achievement on the IDN and EI.
Next. So, that’s all. Thanks for your time.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you very much Doctor [inaudible]. Congratulations on
your 20 million mark, and thank you for sharing all of your
inclusive initiatives. What a wonderful job. Do we have any
questions from the audience?

Page 27 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

I see none. So please give a hand to our presenter. [APPLAUSE]
Next is Roy [inaudible], is that correct? [Inaudible], okay, thank
you, from the DNA.

ROY:

Okay, thank you. First of all let me just start by saying thank you
for allowing me the opportunity to speak to you this afternoon.
Some of you may know, but I’m actually brand new to the
industry. I joined the DNA as the executive director in midMarch. My background is really in leading and helping to grow
associations and business organizations. I’ve been in a number
of industries over the course of my career.
I will tell you that I am very excited about being in the domain
name industry. It’s complex. It’s interesting as all heck, and I’m
having a lot of fun so far. So let me get right into talking a little
bit about the DNA. Next slide please. The DNA is a non-profit
trade organization. We represent the interests of the entire
domain name industry.
Our members, next slide, no, it’s right there. I’m sorry. Our
members include both ccTLD and gTLD registry operators,
registrars,

registry

service

providers,

and

an

industry

consultants. And as you can see, I’ve listed the ccTLDs that are

Page 28 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

members currently of the DNA. And truly, our members come
from almost all parts of the globe.
Next slide. I’m sorry, I think I may have skipped one. Okay, no,
that’s fine.
So in terms of what we do and what we focus on, our focus is on
helping the industry to grow through the use, adoption, and
expansion of domain names.

We provide a forum for our

industry members to collaborate, to exchange ideas, to educate
each other and themselves. And really, to raise awareness of
issues that they all share across the industry.
And we believe that we create value for our members with
programs that are focused on helping to solve some significant
marketing, technical, and policy issues that affect each of them
and the industry as a whole. Next slide. There are three key
areas of focus for us, and I’ll briefly walk you through them.
Number one, content for us is really very important. We believe
that it is for our members, and so we focus specifically on
educational programs of various kinds.
We have speakers at member only events. We put together
webinars, round tables, and that sort of thing for our members.
We believe that it’s important to build, to help build a stronger
community and industry. And so one of the things that we think
is important for our members is offering a forum where

Page 29 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

competitors can come together in a reasonably safe
environment, and talk about areas of mutual concern, and try to
work through some of those issues together.
User awareness, as I’ve come to learn in the course of my three
months, is probably one of the key issues that everyone in the
industry is concerned about and focused on. We believe that
our… One area for us is to focus on what we call influencers,
and by influencers I’m talking about people like a chief
marketing

officers,

marketing

organizations,

advertising

agencies. Those kinds of individuals and organizations that
have the ability to make use of domain names as they build
marketing and advertising campaigns, and branding campaigns,
and that sort of thing.
And so what we’re focused on is raising awareness of the
benefits of domain names, and developing materials that our
members can use when they’re out talking to their clients, to
potential customers, and so on.

We work with outside

organizations to improve technical acceptance of TLDs, and we
believe that a trusted online environment is really important for
all of us, and so we have member led working groups that are
focused on developing and promoting best practices for the
industry.

Page 30 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

And finally, the DNA, we believe, is in a position to take
positions, to advocate for the interests of the industry,
depending on the issue, of course, but those issues that really
effect broad swaths of our member base. Next please. So what I
wanted to do now is to sort of give you a sense of some of the
activities that we have been and are focused on, so it gives you a
sense of what the DNA is all about.
For those of you who attended the GDD, the summit in
Amsterdam last month, hopefully you saw firsthand how we’re
taking a leadership position and leadership role in events of that
kind. About a year and a half ago, this is before my time of
course, we conducted a global survey to understand the public’s
awareness of the new TLD environment.

And we have

established and continue to maintain, what I think, is a really
interesting website.
And I would encourage you, if you haven’t already seen it, to go
and take a look at it. It’s called Domains in the Wild, and the
website address, of course, is listed there. And what it does is,
we’re constantly updating it with innovative uses of domains.
So as we see, new and interesting ways of making use of
domains in marketing campaigns and branding campaigns. We
post those in that website, so that the public becomes more
aware of that kind of thing.

Page 31 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

Next slide please. I mentioned earlier how important we think
content is for our members, and so one of the things that we’re
now in the process is doing is preparing an entire new series of
webinars that are focused on a combination of industry issues,
and topics of interest for our members, and we’re going to be
launching that starting next month.
We’re also working on a series of marketing initiatives to help to
raise domain name awareness in the market. And a piece of
that, an important piece of that is, including putting some
content together that we’re going to make available to
influencer organizations. So for example, an organization that I
happen to be familiar with is the American Marketing
Association. It has thousands of members both in the United
States as well as outside around the world.
And they’re always looking for interesting content for their
members. And so we think that we can put together some
content about use of domain names, and provide that to them.
And of course, that then helps to forward the agenda for our
industry. We’re also going to take some of that content and
we’re going to make that available for our members as well.
An example of something that we’re actually just about finished
putting together, if you would move to the next slide please, is
this infographic that we see here, and we’re going to be sending

Page 32 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

this out to our members actually, in the next week or two. We’re
just doing some final tweaks on it.

But essentially this

infographic is aimed at marketing people and advertising folks,
and it outlines 10 different ways that you can creatively use
domain names in your marketing campaigns.
And it gives examples and so on, and we think that it’s
something that our members, number one, can use when they
are talking to their customers. And again, the DNA itself can use
it when we’re talking to influencer organizations. Next slide
please. Now I would tell you, as someone who is coming from
outside of the industry, one of the challenges that I absolutely
see, that all of us are facing, is how to craft messages about
domain names, that are easy for folks outside of the industry to
understand, without getting bogged down by some of the
acronyms that we are all comfortable, or you are, and I’m
starting to become comfortable with: ccTLDs, gTLDs.
No one outside of our industry necessarily understands those.
And so, it’s really important that we craft straightforward and
understandable messages about the use of domain names. And
so one of the things that we did, if you move to the next slide, we
made this available actually to our members some time ago,
again, it’s an infographic, and here we outline for our members,
suggestions for creating consistent and easy to understand

Page 33 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

messages, that they can use when they’re talking to their
customers, when they’re promoting the use of domain names.
And it’s aimed at the outside world, as opposed to within this
insular community here. Next slide please. This is something
that I’m really excited about, it’s actually something that we just
launched last week. it’s an online members’ community site.
What it allows us to do is it allows our members to more easily
engage with one another, to interact with one another, to share
information. It allows our member groups and our committees
to meet online and to conduct activities online, and it’s a terrific
way to facilitate networking among our members.
And so, this was just launched last week, and we’re just starting
to, you know, get everyone signed up and building it. The next
slide actually is a quick snapshot of the homepage of that
community site. Next slide please. We are promoting best
practices and volunteer efforts to combat abuse through
something that we called the Healthy Domains Initiative.
I believe actually there was a session earlier today talking about
that. And we are also quite active on the UASG committee as
well. Next slide. So I want to just conclude with a quick pitch
about the DNA and about membership in the DNA. We do need
you, we do need you to consider joining as members. ccTLDs
currently represent about 16% of our member base.

Page 34 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

If we’re able to add more of you as members, what this does is it
really helps to broaden and diversify the DNA. And a diverse
member base helps to strengthen the DNA’s influence within
and outside of the industry, as well as adding value for all of our
members, and it benefits the industry, we believe. The question,
of course, is what’s in it for me? You know, why should you join
the DNA? And I would like to suggest that given that we are in
such a fast moving and complex industry, with you know, all
sorts of challenges facing us, working together and combining
our forces, our strengths, makes it just easier on everyone at the
end of the day.
And we think that we are in a position to be able to help you as
business organizations, and in terms of helping you advance
your agendas. And I’ll conclude with the last slide. This is a big
top or a circus tent, somebody just the other day suggested to
me, that this industry in some ways, is like a circus.
There are a lot of folks running around, coming, going, back and
forth. We’re facing significant competitive pressures. We’re
facing significant issues. It’s only going to get busier, it’s only
going to get more stressful. And what I would like to suggest is
that the DNA offers a place where the entire domain industry can
gather under one roof, can combine forces, work together, think
through issues.

Competitors can get together, and work

together on common goals and common issues.

Page 35 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

And so, I would certainly invite you to consider, you know,
coming in under the tent and joining us. I have slip sheets that
just describe the benefits of membership, you know, if you’re
interested. I’d be happy to give you my card, if you’re interested
in having a conversation at some point, and I thank you for your
time.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you for your presentation.

And do we have any

questions?
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]
Microphone please in the center of the room.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Yeah, okay, it’s working. Before I continue, I have to disclose
that I am a member of the Board of the DNA. And what I’m going
to say is not because I’m being paid for that, on the contrary, we
joined the DNA as soon as it became possible to become a
member. And we did so because we really believe in, especially
the long-term [inaudible] the contributions of the DNA, it can
bring, which is what you can say, the making our industry even
more trusted than it is now, and making sure that domains are
there to stay.

Page 36 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

So I just want to say to my colleagues, think about this. We need
more ccs in here to make sure that also our interests, most of us
are different from the organizations that [inaudible] as a registry
for gTLD, so let’s make sure that our interest are also adequately
taken care of, and to ensure that we need more ccTLD members.

ROY:

Thank you sir.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you. Any other comment or question?
If not, then let’s give a hand to our presenter. Thank you.
[APPLAUSE]
And for our final presentation, it’s [Rose Morales] from dot CR.

[ROSE MORALES]:

Well hi everyone. I’m [Rose Morales]. I’m the executive director
of dot CR, Costa Rica, NIC Costa Rica. And today I’ll talk to you
about our marketing strategies for 2015. My presentation will
consist basically of three parts. First I’ll tell you a little bit about
who we are, what is dot CR. What was the context and we
launched this strategy, and finally, I’ll also show you a video that
exemplifies what we did. So you’ll see the videos that we

Page 37 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

promoted, some applications that came out, the materials that
basically we use for that marketing strategy.
And finally, what’s coming next, what we think we’re going to do
this year. So, to give you some background as to what is NIC
Costa Rica. We’re a ccTLD with 19,000 domains. So we’re
relatively small, and I’m going to put that, make that very clear,
especially after China’s presentation. So have, you know, put
into context because their figures will definitely be smaller.
But in a percentage way, it might be larger. So you’ll see what’s
next. And our sales before this marketing campaign, were about
900 domains, maybe 1,000 domains per year. So with this
marketing campaign, we increased to 3,000 domains.

So

basically it was like a 300% increase for our size, it was very
impressive. We’re a not for profit organization.
We do not work with registrars at this point. We’re starting to,
but during this campaign, it was basically, all efforts and all
sales are managed by dot CR. So we’re the sole registry and
registrar for the dot CR domain. We focused our sales on the
second level domain, even though we have other categories. We
just try to position the second level domain dot CR in the local
market.
Before we started this campaign, about 60% of our clients were
international. We sell domains locally and internationally, and

Page 38 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

only 40% was local. So we identified a big opportunity to grow.
Costa Ricans are not known to be very nationalistic, or very
identified with Costa Rican culture overall, and that effects our
market. So the generics are very common. So we realize that
with a big competition coming up with the new generics, it was
time to make things differently and we created this campaign.
So, next. So to give you some background on the… Next three
times, three more times. So basically for the background as to
what was going on in dot CR before we launched this. First of all,
we had to create a communications department. There wasn’t
any kind of marketing efforts ever done. NIC Costa Rica was
created about 26 years ago, and there have never been any kind
of marketing efforts. So there was a lot to be done.
We hired someone in staff, and also found a third party that
could advise us in creative ways to launch a strategy. We had to
find budget allocation for this. So we had to eliminate some
projects to focus on marketing, which was a struggle with the
Board, as you can imagine.

Then we had to, we had the

challenge of making people aware that dot CR existed and they
identified with it.
And we use social networks as a way to do that. Costa Rica has a
strong internet penetration. About 2 million of Costa Ricans are
online, out of the 5 million, it’s a 5 million country population.

Page 39 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

So, we had a lot of space to grow, but a limited budget. The
good thing is that our market, being online users, were online,
and social media was a way that was cost effective, and we
could reach the market in a good way, in a fast and rapid way.
Next please. Our general objective for this campaign was for
Costa Ricans, we call ourselves [foreign language], it’s the slang
or local way of calling a Costa Rican, so we wanted the [foreign
language] to identify with our domains, to have a sense of
belonging and pride, so to link some kind of nationalistic feeling
to what we are.
We’re very lucky to launch this right after the World Cup. So
Costa Ricans, the football World Cup. Costa Ricans, at that
point, we’re identifying a lot with their country, which was great
for us, and went in line with that thought, because we, I don’t
know if you watch football, but we did a pretty good job.
And then so, just keep that in mind. So we wanted to use the
sense of belonging and pride to increase our sales. Following,
we had specific objectives. We wanted, as I said, to generate a
bond between our product and the clients.

We wanted to

increase brand visibility. People did not know much about us or
how to reach us. Want to promote the use of dot CR domains,
encourage Costa Ricans to speak favorably about the brand.

Page 40 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

Basically there was no noise around, either good or bad, so we
wanted to fill that gap with people talking positively about our
product and services and increase sales. Something that is
particularly important, that went hand in hand with this, is that
we completely changed our website, being that we do not work
with registrars, our only way to register domains is through our
website.
So, this campaign needed a complete new website that was very
user friendly and up to date. So we completely changed our
interface, so that’s also key for the strategy. This was… Our
clients, before we started, basically were between 35 and 50
year olds, and they all are pretty much involved in the tech
industry. Very knowledgeable about domains, about how the
internet works, and that’s a very limited market.
We wanted to increase and include people like entrepreneurs,
people that were starting out their companies. So they started
out immediately using the dot CR domain.

We wanted to

include people between 17, I’m sorry, can we go next? Next
again.
There we go. Can we have next? And next again. Thank you. So
we wanted to include people between 17 to 34 years, the
younger crowd, and also, well of course, always the domain
name buying geeks, and the general public overall. So we

Page 41 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

wanted people to know what NIC Costa Rica was all about, and
recognize our logo and our brand so that we could increase
sales. Next please.
Now we’re going to watch the video. This video summarizes
exactly what we did. It includes statistics. Again, please take
into account, these are statistics based on a population of 5
million, with about 1.8 million people online. So, oh, and there
is a viral video that will come out. One of the viral videos that we
used that lasts about 20 seconds. It’s in English, but probably
you will not understand what they’re saying, and it’s because it’s
a direct translation of our slang.
So just to show you kind of communication campaign that we
launched for people to identify with our product. So if you don’t
understand, even though it’s in English, you’re not supposed to.
It’s meant for Costa Ricans. So here we go.

VIDEO:

NIC Costa Rica set a new challenge, to develop a communication
campaign with a limited budget, that would reach a scale large
audience, taking into account that this is a small country, with
less than 5 million people.
The context to this strategy was a challenge to NIC Costa Rica.
Not only did it have it to make the domain, dot CR, well-known,

Page 42 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

but it also had to increase sales using only 3% of the
organization’s total budget.
Studies conducted by specialized entities in Costa Rica,
regarding the behavior of the Costa Ricans, are also known as
[foreign language] on the internet, showed an increase in use of
social networks, and also identified the Costa Rican pride was
more entrenched than ever.
With this in mind, the creative concept of the 2015 campaign
was to empower the [foreign language], a sense of belonging
and pride. For these reasons, use social networks and other
non-traditional media spaces, such as the main channels, were
chosen to meet our set goals. The following strategies are
noteworthy, as part of the communication campaign of 2015.
Production of three viral videos that highlighted the [foreign
language] unique characteristics.
Hey boy. Can you tell me how to get to the box?
[Inaudible]
…strap on your batteries, [inaudible]… continue straight 100
bars, say, [inaudible]. Then you’re going to grab 20 meters
north, until you crash the fence. Then you continue straight,
straight left, and you’re looking for a yellow house with the blue

Page 43 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

dots out front. That’s where the box is. You can park there, but
be careful because they’re after your [inaudible].
For your life.
[Music]
Development of a model application available in the app store
called, [foreign language], which questions how well of a
[foreign language] is a person by asking culturally attuned
questions such as, are you always late?
Use of gorilla marketing strategies, set towards the different
parts of the country, in order to create more brand new
awareness, and more of a connection with the population.
[Music]
A series of lectures in public and private universities, with the
objective of teaching students with different majors topics such
as, DNS, dot CR domains, and new technologies. In addition to
the university lectures given, students in different elementary
school grades received education on the proper use of social
media and internet.
Creation of a below the line strategy, which consisted of
attending various events to have our brand present. Such as the

Page 44 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

participation in the first edition of [inaudible] Party Costa Rica,
one of the most popular technology events of the year.
The amount of news [inaudible] within the NIC Costa Rica
website was increased, with articles and reports on different
subjects, which helped the website position itself as a priority in
search engines through SCO. The www dot NIC dot CR website
was redesigned, and a responsive system was created so that
anyone could register domains using a mobile device.
Agreements and strategic alliances were signed, to promote
joint ventures in technology projects.

The cooperative

[inaudible] Costa Rica was also renovated.
Journalists and strategies were created between NIC Costa Rica
in the mass media, which created a closer relationship and
position in the organization as a key source for technology news
and discussions.
Campaign results.

After a year of work embracing the

objectives, the communication campaign of 2015 achieved
positive results. Given that only 3% of the total budget of NIC
Costa Rica was available, the average monthly subscription
increased by 17% by September 2015, as compared to 2014.
During the time of the campaign, domain sales increased by
310% compared to the growth achieved during the previous

Page 45 of 50

EN

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

year. The acquisition cost for each customer was only 14 cents
of a dollar. The viral videos were viewed a total 338,100 times,
which means that 27% of all people with access to social
networks in Costa Rica saw them.
They were liked more than 10,500 times and shared 5300 times.
The app was downloaded more than 1500 times.
[Music]
The guerilla marketing strategy allows us to contact more than
3,000 people from five different areas of the country, and videos
of the two were viewed more than 1500 times on social media.
On the lectures given to the universities, the message came
across to more than 700 people in the best universities of Costa
Rica, to people with majors such as engineering, telematics, IT,
computing, law and advertising design.
More than 1500 students, 220 teachers, and 100 parents learned
about the risks of social media, thanks to the lectures given in
elementary schools and high schools. Just on Facebook, the
main communication channel, followers went from 900 in
February, to more than 6,000 in March 2015, representing an
increase of 500% in just one month.
On Twitter, followers went from 700 in February to 1100 in
March, almost 60% more followers.

Page 46 of 50

During the guerilla

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

marketing strategy, ina Costa Rica, the team of NIC Costa Rica
interacted with more than 3,000 technology enthusiasts, and
trained more than 60 participants on DNS, and the use of dot CR
domains when creating a webpage.
With the journalists in the strategy, the organization was further
strengthened and recognized as an expert in technology
subjects on the national level, and achieve excellent publicity
results.
[Music]
In relationship to these very satisfactory results, it should be
noted that only $1200 was invested in social media advertising,
and each new customer cost only 14 cents of a dollar. And this is
just the beginning.
[Music]
[APPLAUSE]

[ROSE MORALES]:

Well, thank you. So that was basically the results. I don’t know
if we can put back the last slide? So, what’s coming next after
this? Because that was last year, now we’re going to try to talk
more about what we do. NIC Costa Rica, we not only manage
the dot CR domains, but we do a lot of national scale projects.

Page 47 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

We manage the country’s ISP. We do infrastructure projects. We
do cybersecurity events and training to all organizations in
Costa Rica. So we also want to, want people to know what we’re
doing, and we do a lot of internet policy. So now we’re going to
focus on, next. This is the very beginning, can we go to the very
last? Sorry.
So our objective this time is… Could we keep going?
So now we’re back, excellent. So then we want to inform people
what we do, and of course, we want to keep increase in sales,
which is basic for survival. Next. And we’re going to keep doing
what worked, and we’re not going to do what didn’t work, and
so basically focus on this viral campaigns, very low budget, great
impact.
We’re becoming very popular among the younger generation,
which is exactly what we wanted to do. So we’re going to keep
doing that. We’re organizing LACNIC in San Jose, Costa Rica, this
year, in September, so that we’re also position, key positioning
us as a leader in technology, locally. We are talking directly to
ad agencies, which kind of reminded me of what we were doing
a little bit, so we are going to decision makers that advise
companies how they manage their marketing campaigns,
because they keep advising to use generic domains to start
using the dot CR and understand the benefits.

Page 48 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

We’re going to start lowering rates, which is a big thing for us. It
has been hard to lower rates because we haven’t had an
increase in sales as dramatic as we had in the last two years. So
now, being a not for profit, we can start doing that as our
numbers increase.
We’re also improving our webpage.

As I said, that is

fundamental for us. And we’re also going to start working with
registrars. At this point, we’re going to start with one in the next
couple of months, and we hope to increase as time goes along.
So we’re taking this a step further, and finding allies to make this
bigger and grow, and hopefully at some point, have a good
registrar relationship where maybe they can help or continue
doing the marketing on their own.
At this point, we keep focusing on small and medium enterprises
and entrepreneurs, and hope to make our brand very wellknown. Next. Next. So that would be it. Thank you so much.
[APPLAUSE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Thank you very much for such a nice presentation.
Congratulations on your campaign. Do we have any questions?
I see none, but you have all of the contacts onscreen. So again,
please give a hand. [APPLAUSE]

Page 49 of 50

HELSINKI – ccNSO Members Meeting Day 2 (Part 3)

EN

A small announcement, our next session is cross community
session in Helsinki Hall. It’s Hall A? Okay, it’s in Hall A.
[SPEAKER OFF MICROPHONE]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

It’s Hall A. It’s GAC room again.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Okay, GAC room again. [CROSSTALK]

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

…quarter past three, so we don’t have much… But now we
have to go around the corner [inaudible]…

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 50 of 50

First, cupcakes then Hall A. See you there.

