HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input

EN

HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input
Thursday, June 30, 2016 – 10:45 to 11:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I hope you have been able to have a look at the
communique. We'll start in a few minutes, so please start taking
your seats and, yeah, look at the paper.

OLOF NORDLING:

Dear all, just as a piece of information, for those that are
expecting that the upcoming session will deal with the IGO
names and acronyms protection, that session, due to a very-lastminute change of the agenda for today, has already happened.
So the upcoming session will be the communique drafting
exercise, and you're equally welcome to attend that one, if
you're a visitor, but don't expect much to -- everything to be
about the IGO names and acronyms protection. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Please, Netherlands and Norway, take your seats as
well. I would never single out any particular persons, of course.
[ Laughter ]

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

And whoever else is still standing in the back.
We are now -- I'm handing over to Tom, and so he will quickly
explain why this text as a whole is much longer than we
expected and what we're going to do about this.
Okay. Thank you, Tom.

TOM DALE:

Yes. Thank you, Thomas.
I can certainly explain to you the reasons for each part of the text
and why it seems to have become a lot longer than was
originally planned. As far as what to do about it is concerned, of
course that's up to the GAC. But I'll quickly run through the text
that's been distributed to you via email and also, as per GAC
tradition, in hard copy, explain the origins of the wording, and
then hand back to the chair.
The first section of the communique deals with interconstituency activities and community engagement. That's
essentially about the meetings that the GAC has had with a
range of other stakeholders, including other SOs and ACs. This is
something we always include in the communique.

Page 2 of 6

HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input

EN

There is a statement there concerning the cross-community
sessions and the fact that the GAC actively engaged in those
sessions.
We have a short summary of our meeting with the GNSO.
There is a short summary of the meeting with the ccNSO, a short
summary of the meeting with SSAC which will need to be slightly
updated to reflect what was actually said, a reference there to
GAC participation in the cross-community sessions.
Then there is a section in the communique concerning internal
matters to the GAC.
There is text there concerning the BGRI meeting and the
outcomes of that that we had at the beginning of this week, you
will recall. That text is provided by Egypt, as one of the co-chairs
of the BGRI.
There is a description of the session that the GAC had on
capacity-building. That text was provided by the co-chairs of the
GAC working group on underserved regions.
There are working group updates provided by the relevant cochairs for the GAC working groups on human rights and
international law, protection of geographic names in new gTLDs,
and the NomCom. Some material is being provided shortly on

Page 3 of 6

HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input

EN

the public safety working group and also a short summary of the
review of the GAC operating principles discussion yesterday.
There is a short section on the GAC's discussions on the
independent secretariat.
Then there is a section very briefly on IANA stewardship and
ICANN accountability which notes three areas of discussion that
took place over this week.
There is a section dealing with other issues, which at the
moment covers the briefing that we had from the chair of the
CCT review team and also some material on IGO protections that
is not advice to the board but it is material that has been
included there provided by the OECD on behalf of the IGO
coalition.
The section on GAC advice to the ICANN board, there is a section,
to begin with, on future gTLD policies and procedures. You will
recall this was in the zero draft that I circulated last week. This is
mostly the original draft, but there is an alternative opening
there provided by the European Commission for your
consideration.
We will come back to this drafting detail later, of course, but it's
essentially mostly the draft that was circulated to you a little
over a week ago.

Page 4 of 6

EN

HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input

The

section

dealing

with

privacy

and

proxy

services

accreditation issues, the recommendation there -- sorry, the
advice to the board there comes from the GAC public safety
working group co-chair.
Each of the -- I should point out each of the sections on GAC
advice includes a rationale, in accordance with the requirements
in the new bylaws that will shortly come into effect, so it's an
attempt to anticipate the requirement in those bylaws to
include a rationale. It doesn't have to have a heading saying
"Rationale," but as it happens, this was the way it was drafted so
that's the reason why these rationales have been included and
identified separately for the first time in the communique.
There is a section dealing with two-letter country codes at the
second level. This was prepared by a small drafting group that
was -- that convened after the discussion on Monday, chaired by
Spain but with a number of other delegations, I believe, and
that's where that material comes from.
Similarly, the proposed advice to the board concerning use of
three-letter codes in gTLDs was also prepared -- prepared within
that same small group of GAC members and coordinated by
Spain.

Page 5 of 6

HELSINKI – Review Points for Communique Input

EN

The section on advice to the board concerning protection of IGO
names and acronyms was submitted by the representative of
the OECD on behalf of the other IGOs.
And the document concludes with the next meeting.
Thank you, Thomas.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 6 of 6

