HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 10:45 to 12:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

ARIEL LIANG:

Nathalie, can you try again?

NATHALIE PEREGRINE:

Hi Ariel, this is Nathalie, can you hear me?

ARIEL LIANG:

Yes, I can hear you loud and clear, thank you.

NATHALIE PEREGRINE:

Good, thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Ladies and gentlemen, please take your seats. Those of you who
can hear me, please take your seats. I'd like to call this meeting
to order on ALS Expectations and Criteria. We are unfortunately
starting very late. If I could have everyone's attention, please.
Can we have the document on the screen so we can see it?
Okay, to refresh people's memory – I would appreciate if side
conversations can be carried on outside the room. To refresh

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

people's memory, we have a task force that has been looking
sporadically. We have not met as often as we should because of
all the other demands that have been on us in recent months,
but the task for the various parts of the task force have put
together tentative recommendations or raised issues. The focus
of this meeting is, to the extent possible, can we reduce the
number of options, maybe even come to some conclusions?
You will recall that should we make some decisions on what the
ALAC in general – this does not speak to what ARALO may do in
addition to it – but should the ALAC in general change its current
rules, which are very vague, as to what we expect of ALSes or
what the criteria is for an ALS joining, there's a long process that
goes along with changing that.
Our ALS criteria and admission process has to go to the Board
for its – approval is not quite the right word. They have the right
to object, so essentially, they have to accept what we're doing. It
turns out that a fair number of the bylaws associated with ALAC
are currently out of date and would be more out of date when
we made these changes, so we're probably looking at a bylaw
change. None of this is going to happen overnight, but the
quicker we can come to closure on any of these things, the
closer we're going to come.

Page 2 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

Some of you may have seen, after I sent out this document, a
long e-mail from Evan, essentially saying he thought there
should be no rules, that an ALS should simply be allowed to
exist, dormant or not, and it doesn’t really matter. I tend to have
a different position in that. If we are going to claim we have 200
ALSes or whatever the number is in whatever week it is, then we
should be able to say why it is, what it is they're contributing and
what is the value of them. Otherwise, we could probably get 400
or 2,000 if we simply send out a notice saying, "Please join us,
there's no cost and there are no fees and you don’t have to do
anything." And I think the concept of an ALS was stronger than
that.
So I'd like to open it to some general comments first. Again, we'll
try to keep them brief, and then start going through some of
these items, either discard them as being not worthy of our
future discussion, making a decision saying, "Yes, this is the way
we're going to go" and at least try to get farther down the line.
We are not going to come to closure on everything today, that’s
quite clear. I have one hand being up, and I see two now. We
have – sorry, I'm having trouble with names today. Tijani,
someone whose name I can't remember.

Page 3 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

EN

Thank you, Alan. I would like to disagree with Evan. I don’t
understand that someone who [adheres] to an organization or
to any movement can say, "I am volunteer so I do what I want, I
can stay without doing anything.” So why you join? So I would
like to emphasize on the fact that I disagree with Evan. We need
to have this kind of work done so that in the future, we will have
better quality of members. Thank you.

SÉBASTIEN BACHOLLET:

Thank you, Alan. Yes, I think we try to catch two horse with one –
how you say in English? Okay, you understand what I am trying
to say, that we have two needs. The one is to have members,
and the other one is to have participation, and the fact that we
want to solve two issues at once, it's a difficulty. I was against
some of the decision taken by ALAC about some of the ALSes in
North America, just because I think that at least two of them was
with people who participate through ICANN in different
capacities, and it's good to have them also into our team.
Not to come back to the discussion about if you have right to
vote twice, but I think we need to embrace all the At-Large
representative of end user within At-Large. But at the same time,
we need people, we need organization who do the work, and we
don’t know how to go from one to the other. I understand both
points of view, and I really think we need to discuss that. In each

Page 4 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

region, it may be good to have more organizations joining, be
aware, reading sometimes the mails, and if they are concerned,
to participate. Even if they don’t participate to each and every
meeting or if they don’t participate to the monthly meeting,
whatever, it's important to have them as a member.
Then, do we need to have two types of members? Do we need to
have to be open and to have some reflection on if they are not
participating, they don’t have the right to vote? Whatever, we
can try to find something, but please, let's be open, let our door
open to every organization who represent end users, because
it's what we need. At the end, we are also the voice of the ones
who are not members, and if we are more members, we are
better to explain why we consider that we are the voice of the
three billion users of the world of Internet. Thank you.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Hello. Okay, I agree with what Sébastien just said, and we need
to be open, you're right, but I also think that we need to have
two levels of membership, two membership levels. That is to
say, we can have some active members, and we can also have
passive members. And for those passive members, we won't be
afraid about the numbers and the quality of the participants. It is
very important, because as he said, it is the entity in which we

Page 5 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

are going to find some people who are not elsewhere, who won't
be in other ICANN constituencies.
I think it should also be good to ask those who want to be active
members to participate through reflections, through drafting
documents, and also organizing activities that can be in their
countries or in their environment, be in relation with At-Large,
ICANN and its roles. That will help outreach for ICANN roles, that
will help to send a message about ICANN and the role of ICANN
in our society. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

I put myself out of the queue. The current queue, for the record,
is Satish, Garth, Cheryl and Seun. Have I missed any of them?
Okay. This is interesting. This is the first time we've talked about
– we've had unending discussions about whether we should put
requirements and demands on ALSes. This is the first time we've
said maybe we want two different classes, and that’s not a
discussion I think I've heard before. Cheryl I think is saying we
have had that discussion before. I don’t remember it.
I do have concerns about how does someone who is passive –
how do we recognize when they become dead? And we have had
situations where ALSes simply shrivel up and die. None of the

Page 6 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

people are around anymore, but they're still on our books. So
that’s certainly an issue to address.
The expectations that we have from ALSes, going back to the
original concept of this vibrant group on the ground who is
going to be following every word that ICANN issues and caring
strongly about ICANN issues, I think is a figment of the
imagination of those who created the original structure and may
never exist in the general case. There are a few ALSes where it is
probably true.
Yet, I think if we're going to make claims about having N ALSes,
whether it's 20 or 200 or 2,000, I think we have to be able to
explain to someone – if they care – just what the impact of
having these is. What do they do for us? What do they do with
us? And there's not going to be a single uniform answer, but we
have to have some idea, and maybe the answer is indeed
multiple kinds. I don't know. It's an interesting discussion to
have.
I do think that we need a level of clarity, however, regardless of
where we end up, so we understand and people around us have
reasonable expectations, and I'm not quite sure where that’s
going. Satish?

Page 7 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

SATISH BABU:

EN

Thank you, Alan. I tend to agree that we should respect diversity,
and therefore we should welcome the strong, the weak, the
struggling ALS, all types of ALSes, and the only criteria or
criterion should be of vitality and participation.
Having said that, however, I would like to distinguish between
active ALSes and dead ALSes. We're just coming back from a
mission in China, where three of us from APRALO went to China.
Of all the objectives we had for China, only one was unmet. That
was to track down two of our missing ALSes, and we couldn’t do
that.
The question that we had therefore was, should we then think of
– if we can't track down even within China, then what is the
point in having them on our records? So from our side, we would
like to propose that any kind of activity level is fine, vitality level
is fine, but if they are proven to be kind of defunct, we should
probably let them go. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Page 8 of 40

Garth?

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

GARTH BRUEN:

EN

Thank you. Garth Bruen, ALAC North America. Having a number
of phantom ALSes doesn’t give this group legitimacy, so that’s
definitely a problem. We shouldn’t allow that.
But with that being said, the job of all of the ALSes is to do
volunteer work in their communities. That’s their number one
priority, and we should be enabling them to do so and helping
their work as best we can.
Now, I had recruited a number of ALSes last year, and one in
particular I spent quite a bit of time talking to, and once they
started engaging, they had a very serious problem with the
format of the way that work was conducted within At-Large. It
was very off-putting for them and they just dropped it after a
while. The organization still exists, they did not like the way that
things were being run.
We also have organizations in parts of the world where just basic
connectivity is a daily trial, and being able to participate fully in
the Internet is an ongoing problem. And we need to allow for
different levels of expectation, and we have to reach back down
so people can reach up. And if we have a volunteer group that
spends two years in the mountains helping people who have no
computers and no Internet connection learn about new
technology, they can't be contacted for those two years.

Page 9 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

I think the one thing that many organizations do is they issue
reports. They issue public reports about their work, and if we
can find some way to collect these reports that each
organization already issues and find a prominent place for them
so we can showcase what our communities are doing, I think
that’s the best criteria we can ask for, is to say to all of the ALSes,
"Give us your report, show us what you do in the community.
Not necessarily how you interact with ICANN, but show us what
you do in your community and we'll feature that, and we'll use
that as proof of your organization's lifeblood." Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you, Garth. I raise a question for the people following to
answer or think about. What Garth just said implies – didn't say
it – implies that doing good stuff is important and sufficient.
Should they need to demonstrate that there is some intersection
with ICANN for us to say they're an ICANN ALS? I don't know the
answer, but I'd like to hear from people as we go ahead. Next,
we have Seun. Cheryl, sorry.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

We're easily confused, Alan. Thank you. Okay, let me start by
recognizing the fact that for some time, I had the title of – I think
it was Queen of Process, wasn’t it? And that I'm well known for

Page 10 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

working metrics and measurables and having specific value
attributes for performance, etc. So you probably all think you
might know where I'm going to come from in this debate, and
maybe you've worked with me in Asia Pacific long enough to
realize that a little surprise does us all good from time to time.
I am quite keen on having expectations clearly articulated for AtLarge structures, and indeed individual members within our
regions. I am equally committed to having clear and
unambiguous guidelines and assistance and facilitation to new
and continuing active At-Large structures and individual
members to perform their work within ALAC more effectively.
And we've seen a vast amount of that work done by our own AtLarge staff and some of the work groups that have been involved
over the years that I've been engaged, anyway.
It was very much you got the accreditation and then off you
were. Somehow you were supposed to know how it all
happened. That’s vastly different now when we bring our AtLarge structures on. So I would be very unsurprised to find a
difference in the profiling of At-Large structures which were early
on in the history of our particular movement, At-Large, and
those that have been more recently onboarded in a far more
effective, engaging and professional manner.

Page 11 of 40

EN

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

So we may find, Satish, that it is difficult to track down the two
"missing" At-Large structures while you were visiting China,
which, last time I checked, was a large place and probably
couldn’t have been completely covered by a couple of days' visit
to only a single city. But I do happen to know that within ICANN,
and certainly within the regional Internet governance space, at
least one of the representatives of membership of both of those
organizations exists, and we merely need to ask that person
what the status of those original At-Large structures now is.
It may be that we can then retire them, because it was in the
days where At-Large structures were formed so that they could
have an impact in the early work of ICANN. Not all At-Large
structures, and indeed not all individual members are going to
be equally passionate about all things ICANN is doing at any
particular time, and so I think it's quite natural to see different
levels of engagement and a change of engagement during the
lifetime of an At-Large structure or member services with us.
I am very comfortable with the concept that was born out of a
discussion paper from AFRALO, and Tijani presented it on a
number of occasions and that’s why I said we have discussed
multiple

membership

and

the

consequence

of

those

membership model before, and I think it's one that’s well worth
revisiting. Perhaps with some modifications, because we've

Page 12 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

explored more and thought in different ways since then, but
that’s a great foundation piece and I'd like Tijani to bring that
back and make sure staff has access to it.
I just happen to remember it because I remember stuff, but what
it was suggesting was that the status of passive or active – not
defunct and no longer incorporated or existing, that is a
different matter – but the passive or active was easily
measurable. There were consequences, rewards and benefits
depending on which side of that spectrum you found yourself on
as an entity at any particular point in time, and you could
transition to one and back and through.
So there was the ability to flow, and I think that’s a very
tempting thing to look at, but it doesn’t mean we don’t have
clearly articulated criteria and objectives. We need those.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. The speaker list we have right now is Seun, Kaili,
Judith and Mohamed. We have to break in about 15 minutes,
because the last 15 minutes of this session is devoted to a
somewhat different subject related to this, so I ask everyone to
be concise. If we cannot keep to two minutes per intervention, I
will go to the timer with alarm. Seun.

Page 13 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

SEUN OJEDEJI:

EN

Okay. One of the concerns I have about this is that we're setting
this expectation at a global level, I mean at At-Large global level.
It may be easier to set these multiple expectations, perhaps
RALOs can have it, but having global level expectations this
much, I think, could be an overkill and then could actually end
up putting us in a situation where we may not have anybody
participating in this community again.
I think we need to agree that there are just going to be two
stages: somebody who is participating or someone who is dead.
The dead ones go, and the people participating continue. We
need to have that global requirement, and then each RALO can
determine how they decide on who has actually participated.
For instance, within AFRALO, we're doing that. We determined
that, even though I still have issues with it because I think
determining who is active and who is passive can also be just
subjective, especially if you're going to the level of looking at the
content of what people are writing.
How do you determine who is passive? I'm writing, I'm posting,
for instance, sometimes I just say hi. Because I'm saying hi
doesn’t mean I'm not active, I'm available. So we need to
determine who is going to be the judge for these things. Is it a
fellow ALS member that’s going to judge that another fellow ALS
member is not active, even though the person is active, he's

Page 14 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

participating? So it's easy to get a judgment for the dead ones,
but we need to be careful with the people who are actually
coming in once in a while, and let's not lose them.
My final comment, which is actually a question, is which is
priority for At-Large? Is it participation within ICANN or
participation in the community, in the local community? What is
the priority? I think the former should be the priority. If we have
people participating within ICANN, that should be our
requirement, we shouldn’t go beyond that. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. At this point, the queue is closed because we're not
going to have time to go much farther. If we do have any time, I'll
give it to you. Next, we have Kaili, but before Kaili, I will quickly
respond to Seun – not respond, but comment. The reason that
this task force exists that has driven this thing is there was a
general feeling within the group prior to your involvement that
having purely regional criteria was not sufficient, and that we
should have some general ones. Whether it's this list or not is up
for debate, but there was a feeling that we needed a little bit
more commonality to allow the regions to essentially enforce
things which otherwise they might not have the ability to do at
their own level. So this is the pendulum swinging back and forth.
Where it ends, I'm not sure. Kaili.

Page 15 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

KAILI KHAN:

EN

Yes, thank you, Alan. Well, currently, my understanding about
the criteria of being an ALS is it's made up of end users.
However, I think that it needs to be complemented. Well, my
understanding of why ALSes need to be made up of end users or
consumers is because we are to represent and defend the end
users', consumers' interest. That is the spirit of it, so therefore,
for example – just as Satish mentioned, the APRALO leadership,
we've visited China, the ISC, Internet Society of China.
Although yes, it is a multi-stakeholder structure, however, it
does effectively defend end users', consumers' interest in China,
and to an extremely large extent. So therefore, I believe the
criteria for being an ALS is to be complemented to that this
organization or individual, whatever, can demonstrate that they
or that individual indeed has defended consumers', end users'
interest in certain fields and also to carry out the ICANN's
mission. And that should be the fundamental criteria of
becoming an ALS. So that is one point.
Another point is my understanding is that – because I'm from a
telecom background, so telecom network is not the same as
Internet. Telecom needs to be run by operators, while the
Internet, everything is TCP/IP, so it's a self-running network.
However, there's only one thing for Internet that needs human

Page 16 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

intervention: that is name and numbers. That is ICANN's
position, so therefore, ICANN is in that unique one and only
position that is the governing body. Although, [inaudible] to the
names and numbers, however, it is the one and only governing
body of the Internet or the cyber world.
Therefore, the governing body – or to say, a government – the
principle of it is of the people, by the people, for the people. That
also means that ICANN itself should be and must be of the
people, by the people, for the people. Who are the people for the
Internet? The end users and the consumers. So therefore, I was
surprised to learn over the last few minutes that even within
ICANN, some people thought that ICANN is a professional society
of the DNS industry. I said, well, maybe 20 or 30 years ago that
might be true, but not now, because ICANN is not only global,
but also social.
It [inaudible] every aspect of a human society, so therefore,
ICANN is more and more a governing body and must be of the
people, by the people, for the people. That means of the end
users, by the end users, and for the end users. In that respect, I
think ALAC, ALS, we have a very important mission to think
about. Thank you.

Page 17 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Thank you. Could we have a three-minute countdown timer with
alarm, please? Judith. And that’s not aimed purely at you.

JUDITH HELLERSTEIN:

Yeah. I also wanted to agree with Seun’s comment. I think that
the primary importance of the ALSes that we have and we’ve
reached out to are to get them engaged in the process and get
them to understand what we are about, how we can help them
promote the work they're doing, and what we can do. And for
that, one is they have to come to our meetings, they have to
engage. And if they don’t have any time to engage and if none of
the staff in the organization have any time to engage – and I
understand we're all volunteers – what are they doing becoming
an ALS?
They may have great ideas and may be lurking on the side, but
as I think what you have said before, Alan, is that then they could
be an unaffiliated member. But if we're going to have an ALS, we
need engagement, and we need – you could not come – say, you
can't come to a meeting because you have too many other
things going on, but you can engage on e-mail lists. You can
engage in some of the working groups, you can post your
comments, you can talk about things, but we do need some kind
of engagement.

Page 18 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

And then also, I know in our ALSes in North America, a lot of
them want to engage, they just don’t know how. They really
have no idea how the system works. It's so complicated, the
processes, and so we've been working one-on-one with our
ALSes, and that should help them get reengaged and then pass
it on to their membership so that members can understand and
get engaged themselves. Not just one person or two people who
are the contact people, but other people in the ALS to get
engaged, and I think that should be what we're looking at in an
ALS criterion.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. Mohamed?

MOHAMED EL BASHIR:

I think we passed and we reached 200 ALSes mark, which is a
good number. With that comes a diversity, rich diversity, which
is basically different ways of communication, different working
cultures. The loudest voice should not mean that this is the most
active participant. The frequent e-mails at midnight or every
day, that does not mean the active participant. But we need to
be careful in terms of setting a global practice or at least
benchmark what exactly constitute to be active, because we
have a very diverse community and we need to be careful of

Page 19 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

that. We should not alienate people or make them feel that this
is the only way to do things. That will become very damaging I
think for our members.
We can try to set minimum participation criteria, we can say this
is the minimum that’s required by all members, and those, I
think, could be different options. It shouldn’t be very few
options. But I think we need to be flexible. The number of ALSes
is going very big, we cannot micromanage that number and try
to dictate how they communicate and how they interact with us.
But let's have a minimum requirement of what exactly
constitutes to be active. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. If I can try to summarize for a few minutes, we've
managed to go through another meeting and not look at any of
the individual items, although we have talked around them a fair
amount. We've had some very different positions named,
identified. I have some trouble saying that someone who comes
to a monthly teleconference and sits there and doesn’t do
anything, but his name is logged as attending, is an active
participant, and someone who – to be quite honest – finds those
meetings boring as something, has nothing really to involve but
monitors mailing lists, and when they have something salient to
say, says it, is not active.

Page 20 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

And as several people have pointed out, they come in many
different forms. Can we actually have a set? If we only had 12
ALSes, it would be easy to sign a person to each one and sort of
certify that, "Yes, I watched them do something that was
important," but we're not at that stage and we're not going to be
at that stage again. So short of saying, "Yes, well, we may notice
if someone is completely inactive," certainly if they don’t
respond to e-mails for two years, it's easy, but then we should
probably reach out and find out if that e-mail address is the
problem, not the person.
We did have an experience a little while ago where the person
who had applied and had been a representative disappeared,
and so we reached out to the management of the chapter or
whatever the ALS was, and the answer that came back was
"ICANN?" Someone had applied on their behalf, had been the
only person in the organization to ever interact with us, and
when they moved on somewhere else, it was quite clear that
there was no substance behind it. They may well have had 200
members, but they didn't know how to spell ICANN.
We have had cases in North America – more than one case –
where someone said "I want to be an unaffiliated member. I
swear I am not a member of an ALS," which is one of the criteria
that we have, and it turned out they were, and that ALS had

Page 21 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

publicized their involvement with ICANN so well that none of
their members or their managers knew about it. So we have a
complex situation. We've aired a lot of the options here. I'm not
sure we're a lot closer to coming to any closure.
As Seun pointed out, maybe it should all be regional, but we only
started this discussion because we decided that was
inadequate. So I'm not quite sure how we go forward from this.
Is Sandra going to tell us in one minute how to go forward? She
is. Okay, then we'll give her the floor, and then we're going to
turn it over to Nathalie, who I hope is connected remotely.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Yes, she is.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Okay. Sandra is going to give us a minute of wisdom to solve the
whole problem.

SANDRA HOFERICHTER:

I might be. We just had a similar situation at EuroDIG when we
redrafted our statutes, and we have also the same sort of issue.
On the one hand, we want to stay inclusive and accept anyone
to join the network. On the other hand, we don’t want to

Page 22 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

overcomplicate the whole process when it comes to a vote and
when it comes to take decisions.
I understand the actual problems with inactive ALSes is more or
less on a regional level within the RALOs, because they have to
function, they have to take a vote at some point. I don’t think we
have that problem when we look at the global level, because at
the global level, we have operating ALAC, and we take actually
the output or the input which comes from the regional level, but
the regional level has to function.
What we did for EuroDIG now – and I'm looking forward to it in
the hope this will work – we have two types of membership. We
have associate members which have no obligations, which can
just join as they are available, which can participate, step in,
step out at any time, and then we have a second type of
membership, which is the full membership which includes the
founding members, because there were only 24 founding
members so far, but now we opened up to accept full members.
Those full members, they have an obligation, they have a role to
play, they have to vote, they have voting rights, they have to
fulfill – let's say a more defined set of criteria, and they have to
be accepted by the existing founding/full members. But
participating in the processes and in the general assemblies and
then the EuroDIG of course as an event, that’s open not only for

Page 23 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

full members, founding members and associate members, it's
open for everyone.
But if you want to stay a little bit more engaged, then you at
least are invited to general assemblies, you can raise your voice,
but when it comes to a vote, then you have to be a full member.
And with this, we hope to stay sort of operational, because we
also have that problem in EURALO, that when it comes to a vote,
Wolf could probably tell how difficult it sometimes was to
mobilize all the members to get quorum. I think that’s the point,
to get quorum and to stay operational.
But on the other hand, we also did not want to kick anyone out
just because they have been inactive for the last two years or
they did not speak up on public mailing lists so often. So at
EuroDIG level it's a different beast, I know it's not ICANN. We
hope to resolve the problem with these two types of
membership.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you very much, Sandra. We've heard that idea a number
of times. Tijani, if you could dig up your old paper and distribute
it to the ALAC and the – Cheryl says no.

Page 24 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

EN

I'm saying it's already on the wiki under the metrics site. We just
need to copy and paste.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Then distribute a pointer, not necessarily the – so let's look at
what was proposed there, and we will carry on the discussion.
Tijani, one last word. We're late for our next session.

TIJANI BEN JEMAA:

Yes, really a word. We have had this discussion several times
since very long now, so we have to decide one day. I think if we
continue to do that, we will never take a decision.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Noted. Tom?

TOM MACKENZIE:

Just very briefly, obviously as reviewers, we're here to listen to
the proposals, the discussions that you're having, and it's far too
early in the process to be making any kind of suggestions as to
how you should be organizing yourselves. But this is definitely
going to be one of the points that we're going to be looking at as
part of this review, and so this discussion is an interesting one.

Page 25 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

I'm only just coming in on this discussion, but what Sandra was
suggesting just now seems like a very interesting proposal. I
would just say that there are all kinds of mechanisms that are
used in different circumstances to boost membership in
membership-based organizations. One of them, which I found
reasonably interesting, is organizations that actually require of
their membership – if I can take just 30 more seconds.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Please go ahead, anyway.

MACKENZIE:

Yes. That when members join an organization like this, they
know that at any time, they could be sort of called upon almost
at random to rise up to the occasion and come and present the
interests of the users that they represent on a particular issue. In
other words, becoming an ALS is not something you can just do
casually. You've got to be aware that at any time, you have to –
wherever you come from, Costa Rica or a small African country –
that you have the responsibility to be able to rise up to the issue,
the occasion, and to come and sit around a table to present the
interests of your particular users.
Creating that kind of requirement means to say that there are
those sections of the ALS membership that are maybe sort of

Page 26 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

sitting quietly in a corner and not doing very much, it kind of
puts a little bit of pressure on them and depending on the sort of
circumstance. What's sometimes sort of surprising with these
kinds of models is that you find that quiet sections of your
membership suddenly reveal themselves to be rather interesting
and with interesting contributions to make to your discussions.
Anyhow, it was just a sort of thought about how you can call
upon people, sometimes almost using these kind of random
processes.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you. I'm told Ariel has something. Sorry, you said I should
call on Ariel.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

[inaudible]

ALAN GREENBERG:

Okay, we're going to a presentation from Nathalie. Ariel has
some involvement in it, I'm not quite sure I know what, so the
presentation is up there.

UNIDENTIFIED FEMALE:

Page 27 of 40

It's a joint presentation.

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

Oh, it's joint. Nathalie and Ariel, I'm supposed to call on Ariel
first. Thank you. I'm slow, but I eventually get it.

ARIEL LIANG:

Thank you very much, Alan. I'm doing this presentation on
behalf of the team that helped develop the part of the At-Large
website that will restore the ALS database and then reflect them
in a public-facing site. Just I want to give a quick recognition of
the team. We have Nathalie Peregrine from the At-Large staff,
and also Ozan Sahin from the policy staff is also helping with this
project. On the development side we have a new member. Her
name is Corinna Ace and she's working with Laura's team to
develop the ALS database. Then we also, of course, have the
Indian offshore team and the ICANN IT team that help out for
building this centralized database.
Just to give you a quick glimpse of what has been built out, I will
do a demo quickly, but just a first point is that we have
constructed the ALS application form on the new website to
facilitate the ALS to submit their applications, and then it’s in six
UN languages plus Portuguese. Second, on the At-Large website,
we have this internal-facing database. We can store about 30
different data points related to the ALS, such as their contact

Page 28 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

information, their official English name, acronyms, website,
social media links and all these points, and then we can store
them in one place and they’re no longer spread it in different
spreadsheets that the staff juggle.
So that’s the second thing that was built out, and then the third
thing that was built out is the public-facing tracking page for any
organization that just submitted their ALS application to see the
status of their application, and once it's accredited, they will see
all this reflected on the public-facing site.
All these three components will be ready by July 25. That’s our
target date to launch all these features on the website. So that’s
a quick overview. Now I'm going to share my screen and do a
quick demo of how this appears, so just bear with me for one
second.
Okay. I think it will appear. Yes, okay, and I'm hoping I can... Oh,
sorry, just bear with me. Okay, it's a little bit difficult to see, but
you can look at the left screen. So on the At-Large website right
now – there's a little delay, maybe I will do this over here. Okay,
so on the At-Large website right now there's a section where
people can look at their applications or look at how to become a
member. I'm sorry, I'm struggling a little bit with this Internet
speed here, so still look at the left screen, please.

Page 29 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

If you look at this top navigation called Take Part, and once I
click on it, and then there's a place called Membership. I'm going
to click on that and it will take maybe a second to reflect on the
left screen. And this is where we list the three ways for a person
to become a member of At-Large. One is to become a member of
an already accredited At-Large structure, that will take them to
the list of existing ALSes, and the second will be accredit your
organization as a new At-Large structure, and then you can click
Read More to read the whole instruction how to become a ALS.
Then the third one is Become an Individual Member. I know now
we have NARALO, EURALO that have individual membership,
and I know other RALOs are in process of finalizing that
procedure, so we have provided these three ways.
Then if you'll click on the How to Become an ALS, and then this is
the instruction listen on the website here. And if you scroll all the
way to the bottom, we expect people to read the instructions
thoroughly before they apply, and then you will see the
application form right at the bottom here. But right now this
application form is still linked out to the old one on the
ICANN.org, but then we have built out this new one which I will
show over here.
This is the new application form, and it's a little bit hard to see
for you on this screen, but it's essentially very similar to the old

Page 30 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

one, except we added different fields. For example, we now
allow the organization to put in their official English translation
and also their official acronyms, as well as their website and
upload their logo, so that we want to motivate the ALSes to
provide all this data by themselves, and so that’s the new form.
And then, where this information will go. Once they submitted it,
you will see this is an admin interface where all the data come
into, and we have this tile called ALS List. Once you click on this,
it will take you to this list that shows all these ALSes. These are
the ones already accredited and we successfully migrated the
information over from the old site to the new one. But if there's a
new ALS, for example if you look at the top one, number 245, this
one is still in progress, but we already got the name and some
like country, city, and all this information over. So once they use
the form to submit, all this information will be stored in this
database so that an admin can take a look at it and can also
modify it if it's updated later on. So this is the centralized
database.
And another very cool thing about this database that I will show
you is we also have a field to store information of individual
members, and I will just give you a quick peek of that. So this is
interface, and I'll go to the ALSes section, and then now you can
see individual members list. And then here, we can create a new

Page 31 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

individual member here and now we can put in their name, their
address, contact information, also public profile, all stored here,
so that’s a new field.
And so that’s a quick look of the database, and the third part is
the tracking page, where a new organization submitted their
application, where can they see the status? I will give you a
quick look here. This is called At-Large Structures Application
Tracking, and on here you can see it looks very similar to the
existing ALS page, but what is different is that it can show the
application form, and then if you look at this, this application
form is already in a PDF format.
If it's submitted in other language, we will translate that into
English and upload it here, and now you can also see the
accreditation status, whether it's just received or the regional
[advice] is received or ALAC is voting on that. You can see all the
status reflected here and then also the associated date when the
status changed. Once the status is changed, when we do this in
the admin to change the status, the ALS themselves will receive
an auto-message to notify them that their application status just
changed.
So this is a quick kind of demo of these three sections that we
just kind of constructed. Right now it's not viewable to the
public yet because we want to make sure we do enough testing,

Page 32 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

and then once someone uses the application form, we will
receive all the data successfully, and then the applicant can
receive notifications successfully before we roll it out. We don’t
want to just make it public, suddenly we stop receiving
applications, and we want to make sure all of these are tested.
The last thing, on your left screen, this spreadsheet is a Google
spreadsheet that you see. It's what Ozan has been helping us, is
to collect all the metadata related to the existing ALSes. You can
see this is a spreadsheet with a lot of columns. It's about 30
different fields. Then we have different spreadsheets that have
certain fields of this and we're consolidating them into this one
master table.
Then, after he consolidates the data, he will reach out to every
individual ALS to verify the information and make sure to get the
latest. Then, we will do a mass transport from this Google
spreadsheet to the database that we built out in the website to
store all the information there.
So that’s a demonstration of what has been done, and Nathalie
and I do have some questions to ask, but I wanted to just take a
quick moment and see whether there are any comments. And
we're running out of time.

Page 33 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

ALAN GREENBERG:

And we are out of time. I see Seun has his hand up.

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Just a quick one. When you were presenting the database, some
of the ALSes had no primary contact. I thought that was a
requirement by default.

ARIEL LIANG:

Seun, I didn't really catch your question, can you just clarify?

SEUN OJEDEJI:

Yes, I said when you were presenting the database page, some of
the ALSes had no primary contact. I thought that was a
requirement by default when there's an application, so is there a
reason why that’s not the case?

ARIEL LIANG:

Yes, it's still a requirement. Every ALS should have a primary
contact, and also secondary contact in them. Right now, we're
doing the databases just to make sure all the information is
accurate. We also have some of that information spread out in
some internal spreadsheet we want to consolidate into one.
That’s why we're doing this work right now.

Page 34 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

To be clear, this is under development. This is not production
live. Humberto? We are eating into lunch time right now, but
please go ahead.

HUMBERTO CARRASCO:

Okay, it's just a short question. Because we have had some
applications in the last year, there is a third criteria. The third
one I think it should be self-funding. Most of the applications (I
think we have three) and they put they're not self-funding
instead of – well, in those cases, this ALS had been approved,
certified. So my question is, it's a mandatory criteria or not?
That’s a good question, I understand, because we had some
problems in LACRALO with that.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Alright, I will address that. It depends what you mean by selffunding. ICANN makes no commitment to provide any funding.
Now, whether the ALS is self-funding, that is they collect
membership dues or they go and solicit money from local
industry or their grandfather is very rich, it's not our problem.
Okay, so certainly, they should not be accepted if there is a
requirement that we put money into it. We do not look
particularly carefully at how they are funded.

Page 35 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

We do require that the organization is led largely by users, so if
the funding implies whoever provides the money also is calling
all the shots and appointing the president, they shouldn’t be an
ALS. If they get money through some independent source
because they're talented at raising money, that’s not our
problem.

HUMBERTO CARRASCO:

I think you are absolutely right, so my point is, we should correct
the form, because the way how we ask, there is not enough
explanation about. Because you only ask self-funded or not,
something like that.

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Alan.

ALAN GREENBERG:

We are in the process of revising it, so thank you for that kind of
input, and that is an important input. Cheryl?

CHERYL LANGDON-ORR:

Just to be absolutely specific – and I'm quoting verbatim – the
minimum criteria on this point states, "Be self-supporting, not

Page 36 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

rely on ICANN for funding," which is very different from selffunding.

HUMBERTO CARRASCO:

But you just need to click. You cannot explain. We have three
applications put, "No," and you are not accepting the criteria.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Let's deal with it offline. If we have accepted ALSes that we
shouldn’t have, then we need to fix it. If we perhaps have a
translation issue or something like that, then we need to clarify
the forms and it'll go more forward. It doesn’t sound like we
have a theoretical problem; it sounds like we have an
implementation problem. Anything else? Ariel? Sorry, next steps.
The next steps from the application things, or back to the
original one, Heidi?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Back to the original [inaudible].

ALAN GREENBERG:

The next steps are we asked for a pointer to the document on
multiple levels because we had a variety of people speak to the
concept of different levels of ALSes, so let us get that. We will

Page 37 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

reconvene intersessionally. The taskforce will be reconvened as
opposed to the ALAC as a whole, and see if we can come forward
and propose something a little bit more concrete. Clearly, we
have many different views, and we are going to have to either
decide there is nothing common at the At-Large level, or we will
have to agree on something.
I sense we're maybe a little bit closer in that we have one
concrete idea to focus on. I don’t have a real high level of
comfort that I know how to get from here to there. Any further
comment before we break for lunch? Ariel has a comment, go
ahead.

ARIEL LIANG:

Thank you, Alan. Just want to mention we do have four
questions that we want to ask the taskforce, but I know we are
running out of time, about the ALS database and on the
application on the website. So I think the best approach is that
we're going to circulate the question via the mailing list and get
some feedback. Thank you.

ALAN GREENBERG:

Thank you very much. We're breaking for lunch. We reconvene at
1:30 here, I believe.

Page 38 of 40

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

EN

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Yes.

ALAN GREENBERG:

And the session will be a session with Fellows, the focus however
will not be on the Fellows as such, although we will have a brief
introduction, but we will be focusing on the FY17 requests. We'll
be reviewing all of the requests and what the outcome has been,
and that will be both a good review for the Fellows and for the
people in this group to know exactly how we're funding.
The outcome I will summarize just to encourage you to come.
We had some projects which were accepted, some projects
which were rejected. Amazingly, most of the rejected projects
are being funded anyway through a different path, so the overall
outcome was very promising.
We also have a session at the end on the CCWG and Work Stream
2, which is a very important part of the work going forward in the
coming year. Heidi, do you have anything to add?

HEIDI ULLRICH:

Page 39 of 40

No.

HELSINKI – At-Large Leadership Work Session (Part 2)

ALAN GREENBERG:

EN

No, then the meeting is adjourned for lunch. We'll see you here
then. ALAC leadership team, the five people in the leadership
team and the –

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 40 of 40

