HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 09:30 to 10:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Thank you for taking your seats. Welcome to the meeting
number 56 of the GAC in Helsinki. I'm very happy to be in this
particular place, also in this particular hall which is one of the
most beautiful congress halls, conference halls I know.

So

thanks, Juuso, for building that hall and making this place
available.
For those of you who don't know me, my name is Thomas
Schneider. I'm from Switzerland. We have some commonalties
with Argentina in the sense that our best player missed a penalty
in the game and now we are out. So sorry for you, Olga, but
you're not the only one.
I am the chair of this committee, of the Governmental Advisory
Committee for the time being, and we have a number of nice
people with us at this table, so before giving them the floor to
present themselves and then to all of you, I just want to start
with, as usual, saying that we have, again, a number of new
members, of new governments that are now member of the GAC.
One of them is Belize, and we have the honor to have the

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

minister, minister of Belize here in the room. It's his first time, so
help him get to know you and ICANN. And if he has questions, of
course I'm happy to answer them, but also like to have you
answer questions to him and his team.
We also have other new members like Guyana, Honduras, the
Republic of Congo, the Republic of Suriname and Panama. So
we have a total of 168 members in the GAC. We have no new
observers.

That number remains the same.

It's about 30-

something. So this is, again, a positive development.
This, I would like to start giving the floor to our friend Olof to say
hello.

OLOF NORDLING:

Oh, yes, my name is Olof Nordling, and I am ICANN staff
responsible for ICANN staff support to the GAC. And, well, more
importantly, I've got Karine Perset and Julia Charvolen. And if
you haven't met them, could you please stand up. I think you're
in the back there. That's Julia. All right.
[ Applause ]
And Karine. All right. Over there. There you go.
[ Applause ]

Page 2 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

WANAWIT AHKUPUTRA:

EN

Okay. Hyvaa huomenta. That is Finnish way of greeting in the
morning. So I am Wanawit Ahkuputra. So I am the vice chair of
the GAC and our working, and this should be close to the terms
here in Helsinki. So I live here for the last 15 years, so just
coming back home. So it's feeling great.
Thank you.

HENRI KASSEN:

Good morning. My name is Henri Kassen. I'm from Namibia and
am representing the Ministry of ICT and Labor in Namibia.
Thank you.

TRACEY HIND:

Hello, I'm Tracey Hind from the independent ACIG GAC
secretariat. I'm here with Tom. Michelle Scott-Tucker is our
other colleague. She's not here in Helsinki. She is working
behind the scenes from Australia this week to help us out with
anything we need done overnight. And I'm here to help you any
way I can this week.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Tracey. Good morning, everybody. My name is Tom
Dale. I also work for the ACIG GAC secretariat.

Page 3 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

Just to be quite clear, for those who are not familiar with the
way the GAC organizes its support arrangement, because we're a
little bit different here in the GAC, the GAC receives support from
a combination of ICANN staff -- that's Olof, Karine and Julia who
have introduced themselves -- and also ACIG.

We are an

Australian consulting firm, and we have been engaged by the
GAC to provide secretariat services. So welcome, and I look
forward to providing you with any help that Tracey and I can
give you during the week.
Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Good morning, everyone. My name is Olga Cavalli. I represent
the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Argentina. I am one of the GAC
vice chairs. And be patient with me. I didn't sleep. I watched
the game yesterday. So it's a sad day for me.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Olga.
Before I let you run through the chairs, I just wanted to say that
we also do not just have some new members in the GAC. We
have a new member in the ICANN organization since a few
weeks.

His name is Goran Marby.

He's the new CEO and

president of ICANN, of the ICANN organization. And he's with us

Page 4 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

in the room, so that you all know how he looks like. And he will
stand up now. He is hiding there in the back. This is Goran.
[ Applause ]
So welcome. I'm very happy to have got to know you and am
looking forward to working with you, and of course with the
whole GAC.
So he is -- We will not have -- and we'll talk about this later. We'll
not have a bilateral session with the Board this time, but board
members will be -- and including Goran -- will be with us for
many of our sessions. And of course there will be a round in the
afternoon sessions which are a new format. So now you know
who he is. So talk to him whenever you can and get to know
him. So this is our new CEO.
Thank you, Goran.
Okay. So now I would like to ask you -- I'll ask to go through
every one of you in the room so that we know who is here and
we know who you are. Those who don't know each other yet.
A plea to you. For historic reasons, we don't have country plates
in this committee like you have maybe in other institutions that
you know. So I'm trying to note down where you sit and try to
remember where you sit. And please try to sit, if you can, at the
same places, more or less, all over the week because the setting

Page 5 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

is not the ideal setting with the classroom setting. It's not
round, so it's difficult to see each other, and I'm trying to
remember where you are. And please try to sit at the same
places because otherwise, my list is not worth anything when
you switch around. So thank you for this understanding.
And so let me start on the right end from my side, on your left.
[ Introductions ]

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. So this is a fairly good representation that we have
here. And in addition, we have a number of remote participants.
This is also possible, in case you are not able, for a meeting, to
physically participate, you can participate remotely.
So Olof, who is participating remotely?

OLOF NORDLING:

Thank you very much, Chair.

And remotely in the Adobe

Connect room we do have remote participation from Ukraine,
Oleksandr Tsaruk, the GAC representative, and Mr. Ryzhenko. So
just to complete the count. That's the remote participants we
have registered. Thank you.

Page 6 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

So you may have realized that this is -- this

particular meeting is actually -- there's some new elements to
this meeting in the sense that this is the so-called first B meeting
of the new meeting strategy that ICANN has adopted and which
is in effect this year.
The B meeting is slightly different in its organization, in its length
as well than the other meetings. It's the shortest one. It's only
four days of official ICANN meeting, and also the GAC, for those
who have been here before, it normally starting its work around
Saturday lunchtime and going till Thursday around noon. And
this time, we all, including the GAC, started today on Monday
morning.

There is also -- there is no big official opening,

welcoming event of ICANN. That usually takes place on Monday
morning.
And also, for us, as you have realized we have started trying to
use the time the best we can. We have set up meetings of GAC
working groups every morning, so before the official opening
today there was the meeting, as you know, of the GAC working
groups on geo names which is led by my colleague Olga from
Argentina.
We'll have other working groups meeting in the three mornings
to come, starting at 8:15 each for an hour. And then at 9:15, the
idea is to have a wrap-up for those that will not participate at

Page 7 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

these working group meetings.

EN
At 9:15 there's a wrap-up,

summary, introduction, handover kind of to the whole of the
GAC. But I would strongly invite you to participate in these
working group meetings because this is a unique occasion that
we have no meetings in parallel that prohibit you from
participating in this working group, so we actually deliberately
set them up not in parallel to any other session but in the
morning so that you can participate, because they're dealing -these working groups are dealing with a number of important
issues. And because we have the opportunity to participate with
nothing else in collision in terms of time, please go there and
participate in this work. I think it's -- this would be very useful
for the working groups for the whole GAC and for yourself as
well.
So this is an element that is -- that is new or different in this
week's schedule.
Another element is that usually we have the communique which
is our statement that we -- we work out -- or that is the reflection
of what we've discussed and -- during the week and also with
things prepared before. That is normally issued -- worked out on
Wednesday afternoons in a normal ICANN meeting, a GAC
meeting, and then issued in the night or in the evening on
Wednesday, but this time because of this different schedule
we're trying something new. So we are going to issue the

Page 8 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

communique on Thursday afternoon. We have less time this
time than in a normal meeting to work on the communique.
This is also why we started and we're asking for text bits and
contributions for the communique before the meeting to have
some bases for people to work on. So what you've received in
the past days by Tom is the so-called zero version of the
communique that is collecting all the elements that we've
received so far of people who have proposed to have text in the
communique on issues that we will discuss. So this is a first. As I
say, a zero draft. It's a basis for us to start working on. This is, of
course, not necessary, the finite text. It's just a help in the hope
that we will be more efficient than if we had to start from
scratch. So we were inviting people to send us text pieces
before the meeting so that you can have a look at these, discuss
them also informally and then in the sessions. And then we will
have, as I said, a reduced slot of about two hours on Thursday
afternoon to finalize the communique. This may be a challenge,
depending on to what extent we will have consensus on what is
supposed to be in the communique.

We don't have the

opportunity to go into a late night session like we normally have
if we have to on these famous Wednesday evenings and where
we miss the gala dinner when we have to go into these late night
sessions. We don't have this. So we have to be extremely
constructive to come to an end with the communique on
Thursday.
Page 9 of 24

If all goes well we should be done with the

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

communique before the lunch break, I think. If not, we'll run
through the lunch break, we'll run into the afternoon session,
continue into the evening, but that's really something that I
think we should try and avoid. But we'll see to what extent it
works, but we will have to be extremely constructive and
efficient and so that we have a communique at the end of this
Thursday. So this is something new. We hope it's going to work.
And yeah, we need a constructive spirit, all of us together, in
order to make this work. Particularly if there are issues that may
be controversial. We are not adopting or accepting something
like the IANA transition so we have less fundamental, let's say,
issues on our table this time, but there may be issues where we
have disagreements and then we will need to somehow find a
way through this.
I will give the floor to Tom, just to say that for those who are new
also and also for those who are not new, also the schedule of the
-- our days is different. One of the purposes of the B meeting is
the -- to break up the silos in which many people in ICANN work
so that we are not just among ourselves as governments but
that we have the chance to meet other parts of the ICANN
community, other constituencies, in the afternoon session. So
the afternoon sessions are so-called cross-community sessions
whereas in the morning we have our silo work sessions. And the
afternoon sessions are the same for everybody, and it's

Page 10 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

important, I think, that as many of you participate actively in the
afternoon sessions because we are one of those they were
asking for not just only having these silos but actually having
more interaction with the other parts of ICANN.

And it's

important that we -- we show that we are serious about
interacting with the other constituencies in ICANN.

So I

encourage everybody to participate in the sessions in the
afternoon. They also touch on -- most of them -- on issues that
are very relevant for us. So afternoon is not free time to go and
watch the nice city of Helsinki. It's actually work time. It's a
different format.

It's an attempt to make interaction in a

different way, and hopefully more efficient. With this, I let Tom
make a few additional points.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Thomas. Just to add some points of clarification
about this different GAC meeting and please bear in mind it's
different not just for the GAC but, of course, for all of the
organizations across the ICANN community. Two points. The
first is that as Thomas has indicated to you, the importance of
the cross-community sessions in the afternoon and of
participation of you as GAC members and as government
representatives but also to draw your attention again in
particular to the fact that there is a session on Thursday
afternoon which the GAC is responsible for leading and that --

Page 11 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

that concerns workload management and scheduling across
ICANN, not just the GAC. The GAC chair will be leading that
session, and I circulated to you a few days ago an outline of -- of
that session on workload management and scheduling.

So

please bear that in mind in particular as the GAC is responsible
for leading that.
The second difference to bring to your attention is that there is
no formal meeting between the board and the GAC at this -during this week.

However, board members will be in

attendance at quite a number of sessions, and on some specific
issues including the BGRI work and the work on privacy and
proxy services. Are so the -- I think those are the main -- main
issues I needed to point out. Was there anything else, Tracey?
Please, yes.

TRACEY HIND:

I just wanted to note when we did the attendance a moment ago
there were a lot of people at the back and at the side of the room
who don't have a microphone and we didn't necessarily get an
opportunity to hear that you're here but you're equally
important. Because we have this situation we would -- there will
be two ways of making sure that we capture your attendance.
There will be an attendance sheet circulated that will be printed
out and circulated around the room, so please make sure you

Page 12 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

put your details in that. But also in the recently established
tradition of having a door prize to encourage you to register your
attendance, I did go to the markets on Saturday and I have -here we go -- an extremely attractive locally made unisex, I
might add, unisex tote bag here which is very high quality local
Finnish produce. I'm going to put this plastic bag, because I
haven't yet found a firmer container, but I will find a firmer
container, I'm going to put it just at the door and as per our
latest habits, if you could put your -- if GAC representatives and
observer representatives could put their business cards in there,
it's another way of capturing that we know you're here,
particularly for those who didn't get to speak and register their
interest. Thanks.

OLOF NORDLING:

And if I may add on a more order -- point of order, this is for the
GAC members and observers, meaning the door prize. So well,
whatever else we happen to draw from it we'll discard. Also,
please note when we take a coffee break in a while that there's a
high attendance in the room. The tables are intended for the
GAC members and observers primarily. And I fear that -- well,
some of our GAC members have not been able to -- members or
representatives have not been able to be at the tables, so could
you please rearrange out of respect for the GAC members and
observers. It is an open meeting, yes, but please pay respect to

Page 13 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

those who are here for the GAC meetings -- for the GAC meeting
as members or observers, that they get access to a microphone.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Olaf, and thank you, Tracey, for this very nice door
prize. Just because it has happened before, some members or
observers have accidentally dropped not just one card but
maybe two or three, of course accidently because they forgot
that they have already put one in so they put another one in and
then they forgot again and put another one in. Those will be
taken out. So it doesn't help to forget. So one is enough. But
you should put one in because then we have your name and
everything. But if you do more than one, we'll take all of yours
out. Also, don't take your colleague's cards and put the second
one of them in too. So there's lots of gaming possible, but we
are aware of the possibilities of gaming. So we try to like go for
fair -- fair competition here. Thank you very much.
In addition to this, we have another issue that Tom will -- and
Tracey actually will talk to you which is the fact that we will have
elections soon i.e., in Hyderabad in our next meeting in ICANN
57, elections of the chair of the GAC and of the vice chairs. And
in order to give you some detail about how this is being
organized according to our rules, let me give the floor to Tracey.

Page 14 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

TRACEY HIND:

EN

Thank you, Thomas. Yes, the GAC elections will be due this year.
As stated in the operating principles the GAC chair is elected for
a two-year term and may be reelected for a second two-year
term. Our current GAC chair finishes his first two-year term at
ICANN 58 in Copenhagen. So there will need to be a nomination
for that.
The GAC vice chairs are elected for one-year terms and may be
reelected for a second one-year term. Now all of our vice chairs,
all of our current vice chairs, have -- will be concluding their
second terms at ICANN 58 in Copenhagen, and none of them are
eligible for re-election. So we will be needing new candidates to
nominate for the role of GAC vice chair.
To ensure independence and probity the independent ACIG GAC
secretariat -- that is Michelle, Tom and myself -- implement the
GAC election process and oversee it.
I'm formally opening the nomination period for both the GAC
chair and vice chair leadership roles right now here at Helsinki.
The nominations open today and they will close on the 19th of
September. You may only nominate if you are an official GAC
representative. That is, you must represent a GAC member, not
an observer. You should nominate by emailing ACIG. The details
are in the brief associated with this agenda item in your pack.

Page 15 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

You can either self nominate for a position or you can be
nominated by somebody else.
Now, if you're going to nominate somebody else, it would be
really, really good if you let that person know that you're going
to nominate them and make sure they're happy to be
nominated before sending us a nomination. Because we don't
want people who are uncomfortable with being nominated.
If you're not sure about what the work involves, the leadership
team meets every two weeks -- sorry, not every two weeks. Yes,
it is every two weeks -- every two weeks via teleconference. You
don't have to be any particular type of ICANN expert to engage.
You just need to be keen to get involved to make a useful
contribution. So it's a phone call every two weeks and a little bit
of intersessional work between them.
If you're undecided about whether or not to nominate, I
encourage you to speak to either our current chair or any of our
current vice chairs or to Tom and myself and we can talk to you
further about the sorts of things and the kind of time
commitment and activity commitment is involved.
So the nomination period opens today, closes on the 19th of
September. Nominations are to be emailed to ACIG. Details in
the briefing document.

Page 16 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

If an election needs to be held for either the chair or vice chair
positions, this will only occur if there are more nominations than
there are positions available.
ACIG will hold that election in person during the next GAC
meeting in Hyderabad, and that will be for those who are
present. There will be an electronic email voting period for
those who aren't present in the lead-up.
Unless there's any questions, I think that's just about that.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tracey. You should know that it is -- one of the key
requirements is the time, that you should be able to put at the
disposal for participating in the preparation of the GAC work in
the discussions we are having among the leadership team and,
also, in maybe leading some of the parts of the GAC's work.
So if you're interested in taking on a function of these, then this
is a little bit of work that you should be able to cover in terms of
resources and particular time.
If there are any questions on this, I think this would be a good
moment to give you the chance to ask questions. You can, of
course, always ask us, as Tracey said, us or anybody else about
other details as well.

Page 17 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

Maybe one thing to create transparency here is that some
people have asked me whether I would be available for a next
term, and the answer is yes. So it is up to you whether you want
me to continue to be the chair or not. So hereby, for the record,
I'm available if you are interested in having me again. So thank
you.
Any questions or comments?

Everything clear?

Okay.

nominate yourself, somebody else by this deadline.

So
This

deadline is a hard deadline, so you can't say, "Oh, sorry, I was
too late." That is a formal deadline. So use the time until then.
Thank you very much.
There's a final thing that we would like to share with you in this
session, and then we have a coffee break -- hopefully there is
coffee somewhere. Probably outside by then -- which is related
to -- we've already heard this word before and we'll heard it
several times throughout this meeting, "workload."
Workload is something that is getting a problem to many of us in
the GAC, but not only in the GAC, also with other parts of the
constituency. But if we are serious in following all the processes
and all the issues, all the discussions that are going on in ICANN,
that this takes quite a significant amount of resources and is a
challenge for many of us who have other dossiers in their job
description as well. Not just ICANN. Many of us follow other

Page 18 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

institutions like ITU and so on as well.

EN
And we have had

repeated discussions about how to cope with this workload.
This was, in particular, very challenging in the past one and a
half years where in addition to the, I would say, normal things
that we work on, we had this so-called IANA transition and the
accountability reform that was extremely intense, taking a lot of
time.
The first step of this work is now completed since Marrakech. So
we hope that will help us all to get down to something more
digestible in terms of workload. But there are still -- there is still
-- the work is ongoing on the IANA transition, in particular on
accountability. We'll hear more about that later this week in
several occasions. And, of course, we have discussions on a new
round of gTLDs and other important issues that need to be
discussed. So we will not be bored and feel unemployed. And it
is important that we keep thinking in the GAC on how we
organize ourselves most efficiently.
And Tom has already alluded to this.

There is a cross-

community session on Thursday afternoon that I'm -- I will be
chairing that is dealing with this issue not just from a GAC point
of view but also in general for the whole of the community
because we are not the only ones that suffer under this immense
work that is going on in ICANN.

Page 19 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

And you have received an email about some idea how we plan to
run through this. And it's also on the ICANN Web site in the
schedule. If you click on a particular session, also this one, then
you should see some text about what this is about and how this
is going to work.
So this session that we're planning to have on Thursday
afternoon is, basically, trying to brainstorm in an open and
interactive format about what we could do as GAC but in
particular what the whole of ICANN could do to improve the
situation.
And, basically, we did some initial thinking here in the
leadership team. And what we proposed to you in particular is
to think about issues like would it be possible to have a more
clear planning in the sense of maybe annual planning of what
we expect or what ICANN expects in terms of outcome or
decisions to be taken that you can then calculate and see how
much probably -- how much work an issue will be? And the
planning will be the basis, also, in case there are too many
things going on, we don't have to reinvent the world in one year.
So it is also at least theoretically possible to prioritize things that
we may think that we should do first because they're more
urgent. Other things may be as important but may be less
urgent. So we could decide as ICANN to do something later in
order to try not and do everything at the same time. This is one

Page 20 of 24

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

of the key elements.

Try to do a little bit of a resource

estimation and planning.
And the other thing is -- which is linked to the workload, is the
fact that we are working in these silos. We are working in the
GAC and in particular the GNSO, which is the body that makes
policy for generic top-level domains. They are working in their
silo on a quite quick speed.
And the better we improve communication between the silos,
the less time we need to spend in trying to find out what is going
on and so on and so forth. So we'll come to that later as well.
The more people of the GAC actually actively participate in these
policy development processes of the other constituencies in the
other work, the easier it is for the GAC to react in time and also
be efficient. And that will also in the end reduce our workload.
The earlier we come in with our ideas, our concerns, our
proposals, the easier it is for us and also for the others. So this is
just to give you a little bit of a foresight about what is going to
come and be discussed on Thursday afternoon.
I don't know whether anybody has something to add to this or
whether you have questions on the afternoon sessions in
general, not just the one that will be chaired by us.

Page 21 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

If that is not the case, maybe before we go to the coffee break,
anything, question or something, about what you heard in this
session?
If this is not the case, then, Tracey, would you like to add
something?
Thank you, Tracey.

TRACEY HIND:

Hi. Julia, can you put the other slide up?
This is just a quick announcement. You're all familiar with the
fact that in the background we're working very hard to build a
new GAC Web site. And at Marrakech, it was mentioned that we
would have a photographer to take your photographs -- headand-shoulder photographs because there will be photographs of
GAC representatives on the new Web site.
We have the photographer here with us in Helsinki. We'll also
have them in Hyderabad. So it's not essential that you get it
done during this four days if you run out of time. But if you do
have the time, it would be great if you had that photograph
taken.
He is booked for the times on the screen there. The ones in red
are the times when he's available. We've aligned them to be not

Page 22 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

EN

during GAC plenary sessions. So they're during lunchtimes and
also one in the afternoon on Tuesday. So if at some stage you
could go and get your head-and-shoulders photograph taken for
the GAC Web site when it does roll out. It's not imminently
about to roll out. But when it does roll out, we would love to
make sure that we have got a current photograph of you on it.
And those head shots will be taken in the piazza, which is that
big main area that you first came up to, the big open area where
the opening -- welcoming ceremony was earlier today.
Wear something with a color. White shirts aren't great with a
white background.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Unfortunately, we knew about this too late because
otherwise we would have asked our host to build a makeup
dressing room and put lipstick also for men at the disposal so we
can be really beautiful in these photos. It was unfortunately too
late. So we just need to be naturally beautiful and smile and
look, like, decent and nice to make a good impression on our
Web site for the rest of the world, of course. Thank you very
much.
So this is a three minutes longer coffee break than planned,
which is nice. So thank you all. See you at 10:45.

Page 23 of 24

HELSINKI – GAC Opening Plenary

Thank you.

[ Break ]

Page 24 of 24

EN

