HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues
Tuesday, June 28, 2016 – 11:00 to 12:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Tom. So we will now move to our next
session which is linked to -- or the follow-up of the working
group meeting of the public safety working group this morning
that was very well attended, so let me hand over the floor to
Alice, one of the co-chairs of the working group.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much. We have the slide up. Julia, can I have
the first slide, please? We had a very constructive early morning
meeting, discussed quite a number of issues and also discussed
possible way forward regarding how the GAC may want to
approach this issue during the joint meeting. I'd first like to start
off with a very brief background or context of where this
privacy/proxy services issue and process comes -- was -- came
up. It was first convened following a GAC endorsement of the
law enforcement due diligence recommendations in 2010, and
then those recommendations, as you recall, were implemented
in the 2013 Registrar Accreditation Agreement. However, this
specific issue of privacy/proxy accreditation was then deferred

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

to a PDP which -- the GNSO PDP which completed its work and
now has the final report.
Very briefly, the next slide, please. Yeah. Very briefly, what is
privacy/proxy service, and there I give an example, for example,
my, you know, ww -- my alice.com using a proxy service. You
can see here that it has my address as Arizona, the U.S., but I live
in Nairobi, sometimes in Addis, sometimes in Johannesburg, but
it doesn't really give the proper address or details, my details.
So it's information that does not show the actual registrar at all
and shows the name and contact information of that proxy
company and the actual registrant and privacy company contact
is what is provided. And then just to demonstrate how serious
this is, roughly one in five domains use this service and of this
nine -- it's nine out of ten. Next slide, please.
Previously -- it's good to -- to mention that as previously that
there was no policy of privacy services to date until the 2013
accreditation -- registrar accreditation and very few got policies
and rules existed regarding this issue. So this led to a lot of
unpredictability for stakeholders affected by these services. And
so while there might be a distinction between registrars that are
ICANN accredited because of the Registrar Accreditation
Agreement those who are not ICANN accredited do not have that
obligation.

Page 2 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

So the GNSO PDP that was working on this issued
recommendations for ICANN to accredit privacy and proxy
services. It was approved by the GNSO, and right now we're at -at the point where the ICANN board is meant to be voting to
adopt this -- this report. However, as mentioned during our
Marrakech -- communique in Marrakech, the public safety
working

group

raised

concerns

that

some

of

the

recommendations that the GAC had provided were not taken
into consideration.
So the rationale provided by the GAC in terms of the
recommendations we provided to the PDP was that the P/P
service providers should keep law enforcement agent requests
confidential as required or permitted by laws -- local laws in
various jurisdiction because notifying the customer may actually
hinder investigations. And in some countries they mandate
confidentiality -- there's a mandate for confidentiality of law
enforcement's requests.
The second issue that was not taken into consideration and that
the public safety working group and the GAC had provided as a
recommendation was the requests from other jurisdictions and
how those would be treated.

And especially taking into

consideration that malicious conduct often takes place across
borders and investigations often involves LEAs from outside the
privacy/proxy service provider.

Page 3 of 32

So there is the issue of

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

jurisdiction and there's also the issue of cross-border
cooperation.
The third issue was in commercial domains that collect money
for goods and services and the GAC is of the opinion that they
should not be allowed to use P/P services or conceal WHOIS
identity for this to protect consumers and their financial
information and also combat fraud and crime. And also the
public rights to know who they're doing business with. And this
is in line with disclosure obligations, especially, for example, in
the European Union. Next slide, please.
So the recommendations, I think it's very important to note that
the GAC mentioned that the recommendations are really
positive and the GAC is not proposing to delay the
implementation of the report.

However, we note that it is

flexible enough to allow some of the GAC concerns to be
addressed during the implementation phase, and this would
help avoid the GAC conflicting with the GNSO advice and also in
delaying the program. So there are several ideas. Next slide,
please.
Next slide, please, Julia. There are several ideas on the possible
way forward that the public safety working group has proposed.
The first one -- I'm sorry, the next slide is not on -- that provides - yes. Thank you. So the first issue -- the first proposal is

Page 4 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

regarding the confidentiality of LEA requests.

What we are

suggesting is the development of a framework, a disclosure
framework.

I think that should be possible during the

implementation,

especially

working

with

the

--

the

implementation review team. And then the handling of LEA
requests, foreign requests, possibly also through framework of
disclosure. And then the issue of commercial domains. That's a
much more difficult one because the working group made it very
explicit that they really do support the decision for commercial
domains to remain -- to continue using these services.
And then another -- another proposal is to develop a DE
accreditation process for P/P service providers that conceal the
identity of bad actors and do not respond to LEA requests. And
also the possibility of a differential disclosure treatment in the
LEA disclosure framework for domains processing financial
transactions. Next slide, please. Next slide, please.
Okay.

So this is more information regarding -- just to

understand the process that the GNSO has followed and the
process that we're at. So the implementation process is going to
take about one to two years. And once the board has approved
the -- the report the Global Domains Division will begin the
implementation. And because there were previous concerns
regarding the GDD and how they were implementing some of the
policy -- the policy proposals, there's now -- it's now mandatory

Page 5 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

for the GDD to create what they call an Implementation Review
Team with volunteers from the GNSO and the general ICANN
community. So while there -- I think the public safety working
group and law enforcement agents could be consulted, not
necessarily participate because perhaps this could be too much
work overload. They could consult on at least some of the
relevant areas. And then, of course, the next process now is the - the next meeting that we -- the joint meeting where we're going
to be discussing some of the concerns that the GAC discussed or
raised during the recommendations that we provided. Thank
you, Thomas.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you for this very clear presentation of something that is
actually very complicated in the details so that was not easy. So
we have -- it was wished by the GAC that we have like first a
discussion among the GAC members. Of course, the meeting is
open to everybody, but that we have -- spend 15 minutes or so
among us and then invite people from the GNSO and from the
board to join the discussion. So this has already been presented
and discussed to some extent this morning in the -- in the
working group, public safety working group, but formally we
need to have a quick check with the whole GAC. So please, make
your voices heard now. Those who support this proposal or

Page 6 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

those who have questions on this proposal, the floor so yours. I
see Norway.

NORWAY:

Yes.

Thank you, Chair, and thank you, Alice, for your

presentation. So really, I'm sorry I haven't the full overview of all
the details but I have a question for clarification regarding the
issue two, I think to handle law enforcement requests across
jurisdictions. Is this mechanisms or implementations to be sort
of in parallel or how do they relate to the existing law
enforcement procedures to handle requests across jurisdictions,
sort of the official police cooperation that exists? Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you for this question. Who would like to respond to this
one.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

European Commission.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

European Commission. Thank you.

Page 7 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

EN

Yes. Thank you very much for this question, which gives me an
opportunity to clarify. So this would in no way impact upon the
existing procedure rules. So in every country law enforcement
would continue to comply with the procedural requirements,
including all the rights for the protection of the rights of the
defense and so on and so forth. This would simply ensure that
from the contractual perspective of the implementation of the
proxy and privacy accreditation processes we do not create any
additional obstacles to such requests but they would, of course,
still continue to be subject to the leader framework in each of
the requesting countries and also in the recipient countries. So
no changes would be made to the existing legal framework.
We're just looking at avoiding additional obstacles for those
countries which do consider under their legal framework such
requests to be appropriate. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you for this clarification. Other comments or questions
on the proposal. I see the United States.

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Thomas. This is just to offer the support of the
United States for the next steps as outlined above, just with the
emphasis in -- just on ensuring that the -- these next steps don't

Page 8 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

reopen policy issues which have already been established by the
PDP process. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, United States.

Any other views of support,

expressions of support, questions, comments?

Complete

objection?
Do I take this silence as that you think that this is a reasonable
way forward that is being proposed by our working group? I see
people nodding. I can't see any shaking heads or raised hands.
So should I consider this the end of the GAC internal discussion
on this, that we have support for the way ahead proposed by the
PSWG? If that is the case, I think we can use the remaining time
for the exchange with those who are here from the GNSO. And I
see some board members are also here.
So, maybe if -- there's some spaces for you here. Why don't you
come up, the ones that are the most closely working on this, the
people from the GNSO working group and board representatives
who have been looking into this. That may be helpful.
Thank you very much for joining us. Maybe quickly present
yourself so that everybody knows who you are and how you're
dealing with these issues. Thank you.

Page 9 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

STEVE METALITZ:

EN

Thank you. I'm Steve Metalitz. I'm the co-chair of the PPSAI
policy development process working group.

GRAEME BUNTON:

And I'm Graeme Bunton from Tucows, another co-chair of the
working group. And we should probably also acknowledge Don
Blumenthal who was a chair of the working group for a period as
well.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Maybe I could give the floor to Alice to frame the session and
then we hand it over to you. Is that okay?

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much. And you are welcome to this session.
Just recall the objective of this session is to discuss how GAC
concerns with the PPSAI recommendations could be best
addressed, notably whether they could be addressed during the
implementation of the working group recommendations. And,
again, it's important to note that the GAC is not proposing
reopening any policy issues. We actually do -- we are -- we
support the adoption of the report. But what we want to do is to
explore possible ways of addressing our concerns, the concerns

Page 10 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

we raised earlier and how this could be addressed during the
implementation phase.
As you recall in the GAC Marrakech communique, we noted that
the final report that you produced and submitted to the board
raised some public issues regarding consumer safety and trust.
And that's our Marrakech communique advice to the board to
allow sufficient time for us to consider some of the issues.
That's why we have this meeting.
So, once again, the recommendations are really positive -- we
need to re-emphasize that -- and establish an ICANN
accreditation program where there was none. So it's a good
thing.
And we also note that the report seems to be flexible, and it may
allow for the GAC concerns to be addressed again during the
implementation phase. So that's the objective of this session,
and we would like to have that discussion with you especially
around the few, three or so, issues that we had addressed.
Thank you.

STEVE METALITZ:

Thank you very much. This is Steve Metalitz for the transcript.
First of all, I want to thank the GAC for this opportunity to have
this discussion with you. And I know I sat in on some of the

Page 11 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

earlier public sessions this morning, and it was very helpful for
us to gain a better understanding of the thinking behind the
comments. And we do appreciate the comments we receive
from the public safety working group on our initial report.
I can assure you -- and I think I can speak for Graeme on this also
-- that the issues that were raised by the PSWG were very
thoroughly considered and discussed by our working group in
preparing its report. In one case at least the issue regarding
commercial uses -- use by commercial players, that was perhaps
the single issue that we devoted the most time to discussing.
We think that looking back on our two-year process of the
working group, I think that more active participation by law
enforcement representatives in the overall work of the group
and better communication from us to the public safety working
group would have been beneficial. I think we have some lessons
to be learned from that. And, hopefully, we can do a better job
on both sides with that communication going forward.
I also want to very much express my appreciation for the
comments that you and others have made about not wishing to
hold up the implementation of these recommendations. We do
appreciate that and hope that the board will be in a position to
move promptly to approving these.

Page 12 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

Implementation is going to be a difficult, complicated process.
And we knew that even before the GAC advice from Marrakech.
There are many issues that have to be resolved in the
implementation process.
And I also appreciate your pointing out that the interim rules
that are in effect right now, which are quite minimal by their
own terms, expire at the end of this year. So we have no time -we really need to be moving ahead on implementation as
quickly as we can.
I did want to comment on one of the slides that indicated -- that
talked about the implementation process and indicated that the
implementation review team could consult with the PSWG and
with GAC representatives and others in its work.
I would go farther than that, unless the staff will correct me if I'm
wrong. I would hope that the PSWG would participate, that its
representatives

would

participate,

actively

in

the

Implementation Recommendation Team, the IRT.
It's a relatively new modality that we have for handling
implementation or at least it's new that it's mandatory. And this
is a good example of why we need a good, strong
implementation review team. And I think that representatives
from law enforcement, from the PSWG hopefully will play an
active role in that team. I think that would definitely improve

Page 13 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

the quality of the implementation that we're able to
recommend.
So those are at least my general responses. And I'm happy to
yield to Graeme for other thoughts on this.

GRAEME BUNTON:

Thanks, Steve. No, I think you covered a lot of that very clearly.
I think going forward we need to be careful about how we
approach implementation and make sure we're doing that with
clarity and a light touch. But it does feel like there is some room
to move forward there and hopefully come to some
compromises. Thanks.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much.
As you can see here, we have three areas that we would like to
perhaps discuss with you further. And one of them is could a
satisfactory disclosure framework for law enforcement agent
requests including confidentiality requirements be developed in
the implementation phase? What do you think about that?
And, also, jurisdictional issues and concerns.
And are there any ways to mitigate GAC concerns about allowing
domains that seek financial information from people?

Page 14 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

So those three we would like to share any views you may have
on that and how those could be approached during the
implementation phase. Thank you.

STEVE METALITZ:

Thank you for those questions and those points. Let me try to
take them in the order that they appear on your list.
We -- I think you can see from the working group final report that
we flagged the lack of a disclosure framework for LEA requests
as a gap that still had to be filled. So I think in the
implementation process, that would be an appropriate time to
figure out what's the best way to facilitate getting that gap filled
because it exists now.
On the confidentiality point there, again, I would say -- I think I
saw one slide earlier that suggested that there wasn't any
requirement about this in the report.

And I have to differ

slightly.
The report says the working group recommends that accredited
privacy/proxy service providers should comply with express
requests from law enforcement agencies, not to notify a
customer where this is required by applicable law.
So I think it's pretty clear that if you are in a jurisdiction where
you receive a request from your local law enforcement and you

Page 15 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

have a legal requirement not to disclose that, that if you do
disclose that, that would have consequences for your
accreditation. So it would be incorporated into the accreditation
standards where it's a requirement of the applicable law.
I understand the concern that was raised by the PSWG was to go
farther into situations where it's not a requirement for
applicable law. And the report does stress that it's not intended
to prevent providers from either voluntarily adopting more
stringent standards or from cooperating with law enforcement.
So hopefully that provides some guidance at least in that area
on the first question.
On the second one, I do want to say we understand the concern
about the jurisdictional issue. And really this boils down to
obligation to respond to law enforcement requests that are not
from your jurisdiction, you the service provider.
And we felt we had relatively little room to maneuver on that
question because it had been discussed or worked out in the
Registrar Accreditation Agreement which was adopted just a
year or two before we started work -- or maybe the year before
we started work on this process. Maybe it was the same year. It
was about the same time.

Page 16 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

And that decision that was reached there -- or the resolution
that was reached there was that it only applied to requests
within the jurisdiction.
We felt it would be very difficult to reopen that question when,
again, if you look at who is providing these services now, for the
most part, it's the affiliates of accredited registrars that are
living under the 2013 RAA and have that rule about when they
are obligated to respond.
Obviously if that changes, if there is a way to resolve that
broader question of how service providers should respond -should validate and respond to requests from outside their
jurisdiction, we put in -- if that's changed in the RAA, our
recommendation was that it automatically be changed in the
accreditation standards as well. So if that broader question can
be resolved, then it would automatically be incorporated within
the accreditation standards.
Maybe I could stop there and just see if Graeme has anything to
add on those two points because I think the third one was is a
little bit different.

GRAEME BUNTON:

Page 17 of 32

No, I think that was well-summarized, Steve.

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

STEVE METALITZ:

EN

And, finally, on the third point, use by commercial provider -- use
of privacy and proxy services by commercial entities, if I can
summarize it that way, as I said, this was really the single issue
that probably occupied the most time and energy within our
working group. It was the subject of many, many thousands
literally of public comments or of petitions that we received.
The views were actively debated within the working group. And I
think it's fair to say that included the views that are parallel to
those that were recommended by the PSWG. And we were
ultimately able to achieve a consensus, I think, that there are
many working group members that would share the
disappointment that the PSWG felt with where that consensus
came out. But I think that's kind of the essence of the process
that we went through, was that even to there was
disappointment about that, there was a sense that this was
under the ICANN standards a consensus that had been reached.
We did point out in the report that some privacy/proxy providers
have this type of restriction already in their rules. And it's
spelled out in the report that there's no wish to discourage
providers from adopting similar policies.
One touchstone, I think, of the report is that we do recognize the
need for the service providers to have flexibility in their policies
and also to have the capability of enforcing them.

Page 18 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

So -- and we also stressed that the provider should remain able
to terminate this privacy/proxy service to a customer that's
engaged in commercial transactions with domain names using
the privacy service that carry out illegal activities or that abuse
the terms of -- violate the terms of service in other ways.
But I think the point that you raised in the -- that was raised in
the -- one of the slides about possibly incorporating this into a
disclosure framework for law enforcement, I think that's an
excellent idea if that can be done, because we -- I think we all
recognize that some uses of these services by commercial
entities may also involve illegal activities and we need to be able
to find some way to thread that needle and make sure that
there's an obligation to deal with those.
So hopefully in the -- my view, anyway, is that in the
implementation process, we can build on the experience of the
service providers that have a policy like this in place.
And the other thing that implementation, I'm sure, will do -- the
implementation review team -- is recommend what points about
the policy should be reviewed, and when, so we can see whether
we are, in practice, having a problem here, a gap here that
would need to be filled.
So I'll stop there and pass to Graeme.

Page 19 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

GRAEME BUNTON:

EN

Thanks, Steve. This is Graeme.
I think Steve is right that there is some room there for mitigation
of LEA concerns specifically around the commercial distinction
issue. Perhaps I can add a bit of color from the other perspective
on that one, which is that there are many members of the
working group much relieved to know that people like dissident
bloggers with PayPal donate buttons or 501(c)(3) organizations
with PayPal donate buttons would still be afforded protection
under privacy services, and there are many similar reasons that
the working group found and ultimately, I think found quite
compelling, to not provide a distinction there on the commercial
services question. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you very much. If GAC colleagues have questions or
comments? Indonesia.

INDONESIA:

Can I ask a question from your explanation there where you
mentioned that if an operator discloses information to the law
enforcement agency which is not in line with the bylaws or
regulation internally, that will affect their accreditation,
something like that.

Page 20 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

Now, my question is: What is the effect of this accreditation for
that local organizations? Will -- will it -- say will it reduce -because of that, the accreditation is going -- is ranked down, will
it be affected for their operation daily or something like that?
What is the effect of this -- that accreditation? Thank you.

STEVE METALITZ:

Yes. Thank you for that question.
Let me just clarify something. This is not really -- this doesn't go
directly to the issue of whether the service provider would
respond to the law enforcement organization by providing the
information. This question of the confidentiality is whether they
tell their customer that this request has been made. That's, I
think, the issue that we're focusing on here.
So I just wanted to clarify that.
I think the whole idea of having accreditation of these providers
is that once the accreditation framework is in place and has
been implemented, then registrars will only be able to deal with
those providers who are accredited and they won't be able to
accept proxy registrations or privacy registrations from
unaccredited providers.
So in the case --

Page 21 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

For example, if there were a local law in place that said that
these requests from law enforcement have to be held in
confidence and a provider systematically abused that and did -and did disclose to the customer when the law said they
shouldn't, that could be the basis for removing the accreditation
of the service provider.
And if that were to occur, then all the accredited registrars could
no longer accept registration -- proxy registrations from that
service provider.
I know this is a bit complicated because we have two -- we will,
once this is in place, have two accreditation systems, one for
registrars that we've had for many years within ICANN, and the
other for these service providers. Graeme?

GRAEME BUNTON:

Thank you. I think what I hear your question getting at is what
happens during a de-accreditation of a privacy service provider
and the domain names that were previously protected.
And there is no immediate answer to that, and I think what your
question highlights is the complexity that's going to be involved
in the implementation of this -- of the output of this PDP, and it's
another good reason why we need to move forward on this as
quickly as we can because it's going to be a lengthy,

Page 22 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

complicated process that requires serious careful thought to
address concerns like that. Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. European Commission?

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

Thank you, Alice.
I just want to briefly react to two of the points that have come
up.
First of all, the rule on disclosure, where you rightly say that of
course this doesn't prevent the situation where national laws
already oblige keeping such requests confident, as do any other
rules that we adopt here, because as I said before, we do not
impact on the national legal frameworks for any of these rules.
But what you are creating, in essence, is a new default, and
while you say that there is a possibility, of course, for registrars
and proxy/privacy services to adopt stricter rules, you will be
creating the default and any work that proxy/privacy services
are willing to do to accommodate law enforcement requests
would be additional work that is not laid down in these rules.
I think we have to come back to what we are looking at here. It
is basically specific law enforcement requests in individual

Page 23 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

criminal investigations asking for information that for other
services is already, by default, public, so it is not particularly
sensitive information.
But on the other hand, the fact that such requests would
automatically be forwarded to the user making use of these
proxy/privacy

services

would

endanger

the

criminal

investigation in almost all of the cases.
So by creating this default, you are negating the possibility for
law enforcement to use these requests as a useful tool for their
investigations and I think that is a very important point to
consider.
I also do not see that the current rules in the registration -- in the
registry accreditation -- registrar accreditation agreement of
2013 would in any way pose an obstacle to the types of rules
that we are suggesting you put in place here because they deal
with the default situation of the public WHOIS. They do not have
any specific requirements for this situation. And they also do
not prevent us from adopting rules that are appropriate for the
specific case that we are dealing with here.
And I want to remind everybody again that this is a very specific
case. We're not dealing with general access by just anybody to
the type of information that is held by proxy/privacy services but
by accredited, authorized law enforcement agencies who are

Page 24 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

making these requests in individual criminal investigations, and
we're also not talking about mass surveillance, and I think that
point needs to be remembered in this discussion.
So on those two points, I really do not see that there is any legal
obstacle to accommodating the requests that the public safety
working group is proposing for the GAC to make.
Thank you.

STEVE METALITZ:

Thank you very much for that comment.
Yes, I would agree with you that these rules that are proposed in
the recommendations of the working group do not require the
service providers to maintain confidentiality where that's not a
requirement of the applicable law. Where it is, they are required
to, and you're absolutely right, we can't change that law or
affect it.
I think the effect of that would be that if they violate that law,
they can also lose their accreditation, which is, you know,
commercially valuable to them, presumably. So that is certainly
some incentive to do it.
And I think -- if I heard you correctly, I don't think we're
providing

Page 25 of 32

organizations

with

an

incentive

to

violate

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

confidentiality in a case where there is no legal requirement for
them to maintain confidentiality. I think what's spelled out in
the report is actually the opposite, which is that there's some
encouragement for them to do that when they receive that
request. But you are right, that's not a requirement in the rules
as they come out from this working group.
On the jurisdictional question, I would just say that I don't -- I
think you're correct. It's not a legal impediment. I -- we viewed
it as a practical impediment. That this is where the issue came
to rest in the RAA discussion, and it is a difficult question as to,
as you referred to, an accredited law enforcement request from
outside the jurisdiction, and my sense is -- there are obviously a
lot of people in this room that are far more knowledgeable
about this than I am, but my sense is that that label can be very
difficult to apply in some cases, and when a service provider in
Jurisdiction X receives what appears to be a law enforcement
request from Jurisdiction Y, it's not always clear on its face that
this is from any type of accredited law enforcement provider. So
-- law enforcement agency.
So that's a bigger question which I think does need a resolution.
The working group just felt it was beyond its practical
capabilities to achieve that resolution, and that's why we, in
effect, defaulted to what is already in the RAA.

Page 26 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

GRAEME BUNTON:

EN

Thanks, Steve. Yeah, I think that's an interesting point, that
solving the jurisdiction issue is a very big question. It's an
interesting opportunity for the community to look at how to do
so, but that needs to be in a -- in a larger forum than this
particular working group.
And I do think, on the disclosure piece, that we worked quite
hard for quite a long time to try and balance civil society
interests, business interests, and intellectual property interests,
and as mentioned, there was perhaps not enough law
enforcement involvement in the working group to really balance
those interests as well, but I do think there was a reasonable job
done there, and so I'll -- your concerns are interesting and we
can take those on board.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you. Spain?

SPAIN:

Sorry. From what I'm hearing, correct me if I'm wrong, but I see
little room and, above all, little will to take GAC concerns into
account and do something during the implementation phase to
address them properly.

Page 27 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

So I would like to ask you: What are the reasons the GAC should
have to give its approval to the report by the working group and
leave -- and trust that our GAC concerns can be dealt with in the
implementation phase?
I would like to hear the reasons that you would present to us to
endorse the recommendation as it is and trust that our concerns
that are very legitimate can be addressed in a future stage.
I would like to remind that the hurdles law enforcement
authorities
enforcement

find
of

in
laws

implementing
results

and

many

overseeing

times

in

the

Internet

fragmentation, because sometimes we have to regard to
blocking because we are not able to trace back the person
responsible for -- to determine -- for certain content, and in the
end, we have to take recourse through those kinds of measures,
which are very undesirable but we are left with no other
recourse. Okay.

GRAEME BUNTON:

Thank you for the question.
This is Graeme, for the transcript.
I think one of the reasons that we should move forward, as has
been mentioned already, and that's that the interim spec
expires at the end of this year, and so as of Jan 1, 2017, there will

Page 28 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

be no rules for privacy and proxy service providers, and so that
should serve as reasonable impetus to make sure that we're
moving forward with some sort of process to make sure we have
some rules in the immediate future.

STEVE METALITZ:

Yeah. This is Steve Metalitz.
If I could just build on that. I think, yeah, it was mentioned by
several of the previous speakers from the GAC in the earlier
session.
The current environment is not really sustainable.

It's a

completely unregulated, if you will, environment, and now I like
to say that if .PROXY were its own generic top-level domain, it
would be the second largest in the world. It's about one-fifth of
all registrations. Literally tens of millions. And there really
aren't any rules that apply to when -- you know, to who can use
it, to when it would -- what are the procedures for finding out
this information when it's needed, for example, as you reference
in the intellectual property area, as well as others.
So I think the justification, if you will, for moving this process -for the GAC to allow the process to move forward is to try to take
at least a first step in bringing a certain degree of order and

Page 29 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

predictability and consistency to what is currently an
unpredictable and inconsistent environment.
And the path that ICANN has chosen to try to do this is through
an accreditation process. And this would set at least the basic -the basic rules for that.
Thank you.

ALICE MUNYUA:

Thank you.
Any other questions or comments?
Okay. If there are no comments, I thank GAC chair for way
forward.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. First of all, thank you, in particular the two of you,
also for coming here. We see how important this exchange is
that people can ask questions, that you understand where these
questions come from. You can explain your rationale, not just in
paper but orally to people, which is very helpful for us in turn,
and I think we have to continue, as you say, this dialogue and be
much more present.
The only problem from the government side is that we normally
get more tasks but less resources to do this, which is something

Page 30 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

we're learning to cope with. But I think that the will is definitely
there to build on this interaction, which is extremely helpful, I
think, for both sides and should foster all together coming up
with solutions that are progresses rather than steps backwards.
And I think this is a good example of, I think, we have achieved
or we will achieve a lot of progress. And let's hope that during
the implementation, we will get to a point where we get the best
out of it that is a good balance for all concerns involved. So I
would really like to thank you very much for coming here. And
also, those board members who have listening carefully, not
saying anything but listening carefully, of course I think that's
been noted.
And we have some time for one more comment from you or from
anybody else, if you wish.

STEVE METALITZ:

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I would just thank you
again for this opportunity. I endorse everything that you said.
And I think, again, in response to the last question, there's a
trust component but there's also a participation component.
We need the input from the law enforcement community to do a
better job on implementation.

Page 31 of 32

HELSINKI – Privacy and Proxy Services Accreditation Issues

EN

So I hope that when -- if this moves forward and when the IRT,
the Implementation Review Team, is set up, that there will be a
way to have active participation from law enforcement.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We'll try to make sure that you will get one person per all of the
168 countries of the GAC to participate in your work.
No. Thank you. I think this request is noted or invitation is
noted, and we hope -- we'll do all our best to be present in this.
So thank you very much. So we close this session for now and
can actually move on to the next one.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 32 of 32

