ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 1

Transcription ICANN Helsinki
GNSO Review of All Rights Protection Mechanisms (RPMs) in All gTLDs PDP
Working Group
Thursday, 30 June 2016
Note: Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases it is incomplete or
inaccurate due to inaudible passages or transcription errors. It is posted as an aid to
understanding the proceedings at the meeting, but should not be treated as an
authoritative record. The audio is also available at
The recordings and transcriptions of the calls are posted on the GNSO Master Calendar
page http://gnso.icann.org/en/group-activities/calendar

J. Scott Evans:

Good morning, everyone. My name is J. Scott Evans. I am Associate General
Counsel at Adobe Systems, Incorporated and I am one of the three co-chairs
of this working group which is the review of all rights protection mechanisms
working group. This is our open meeting in Helsinki on Thursday, June 30,
2016. It is 8:00 in the morning. I don’t know if we have others on the phone
with us but if you are, welcome for joining up.
Up at the front of the room with me is also Phil Corwin who is another of the
co-chairs. Unfortunately, Kathy Kleinman had to fly home early due to a
family emergency and she will not be going us today. I hope you all will keep
her in your thoughts. Also, up here with me today is Mary Wong who, if you
are on the phone calls, is a very intimate driver of everything we do here in
preparation of a lot of the materials.
At the end of the table there, on my right hand side of the room is David
Cake. He is sitting next to Kurt and he is another ICANN staff member who

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 2

has been very helpful in keeping us on track and developing materials that I
want to thank them both for all their help and for being with us today. As we
get started, the first thing I’d like to do since this is our first face to face
meeting that we’ve had since we started our work about two months ago, I
would like to go around the room and we will begin on my left at the very far
end and if you would introduce yourself. Tell us what your day job is and then
who you are connected to within the ICANN ecosphere. I am a member of the
business constituency and former two or three, maybe four time president of
the Intellectual Property Constituency years ago and that is my affiliation. So,
we will start down at the end of the room.
Ellen Shankman: Ellen Shankman, my affiliations with ICANN have been counselor in the
GNSO, officer in IPC. I am privileged to have been an IRT and most recently
NomCom.
Jeff Neuman:

I am Jeff Neuman. I don’t think we have enough time to go through all of my
ICANN affiliations but mostly here in my capacity as one of the co-chairs of
the subsequent procedures working group, so our work is closely tied. I
participate officially along with a company called Cum Laude in Valideus and
we’re a member of the registrar stakeholder group and participate on behalf
of our clients in the registry stakeholder group and IPC.

(Beth Bacon):

Good morning everyone. I am (Beth Bacon). I am with public interest registry
and through the registry stakeholder group.

(Brian Somalik):

Hi, (Brian Somalik), also public interest registry with the registry stakeholder
group.

(Christine Durane):

(Christine Durane) with Amazon Registry Services with registry

stakeholder group.
(Pete Dixson):

(Pete Dixson) with Amazon Registrar, the registrar stakeholder group.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 3

Man:

(Unintelligible), electronic (unintelligible) England and non-commercial
stakeholder group.

(Elon Tigram):

(Elon Tigram) with the world intellectual property organization.

(Darcy):

(Darcy) (Unintelligible), I am with Endurance International. I do corporate
compliance, part of the registrar stakeholder group.

(Sara Bocke):

(Sara Bocke) with Godetti, part of the registrar stakeholder group.

Brian Beckham:

Good morning, I’m Brian Beckham, head of the Internet Dispute Resolution
Section at the World Intellectual Property Organization. We are the leading
EDRP provider globally.

(Luke):

Hello everyone, my name is (Luke) (Unintelligible), I have a registrar
operation in London (unintelligible) associates and (unintelligible) specialized
intellectual property online and Italy (unintelligible). My affiliation with ICANN
is dating long back. IPC member since a number of years, 2001, my first
ICANN, and (unintelligible) registry group member as well.

Nick Wood:

Nick Wood from Valideus, in this environment I represent MARQUES which
is a member of the IPC.

(John Acquaine): I’m (John Acquaine), I’m a lawyer with Nelson Mullins. I’m with the IPC and I
am the current chair of the internet committee for the International Trademark
Association.
(Molly Shannon): I am (Molly Shannon), I am the senior director for Internet Policy for the
International Trademark Association and a longtime member of the
community, most recently with the NCSG and currently treasurer of the IPC.
Philip Corwin:

Phil Corwin, I am one of the three co-chairs of this working group. I am
founding principal of Virtual Law which is an IP and internet policy consulting

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 4

firm working in Washington. I am coming up on 10 years as counsel of the
internet commerce association which I represent within the business
constituency. I’m one of the business constituencies to GNSO counselors. I
am also co-chairing the working group on Curative Rights Processes for
IGO’s and I am a proud member of (unintelligible) Internet Committee.
J. Scott Evans:

I guess I should also disclose many people in the room know me but just in
case I don’t want to be hiding anything, I am also former president of the
International Trademark Association. I am past president from last year so I
don’t want anyone to think that I’m stealthily trying to not disclose all of my
connections here; if we could just get (Beth) real quick who is stuck
(unintelligible).

Beth Allegretti:

Hi, I’m Beth Allegretti from Fox Entertainment Group. I manage the global
domain portfolio and I’m part of the DC.

Man:

(Unintelligible) registry and some registrars, too.

Reg Levy:

Reg Levy from Mind Machines, we are a vertical integrated registry registrar
and I sit on the executive committee of the registry stakeholder group.

Denise Michel:

Denise Michel, with Facebook and the business constituency.

(Yvette):

(Yvette) (Unintelligible), I am an Italian Hungarian lawyer and I am the URS
case manager of MSFD based in Milan, it’s the third URS provider.

Man:

(Unintelligible), Milan based lawyer and cofounder of MSSD, the
(unintelligible) provider since 2000 for (unintelligible) and the mediation case
manager.

Woman:

(Unintelligible), with former (unintelligible), the forum for an ICANN credited
provider.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 5

(Alistar Payne):

(Alistar Payne), Matison Lawyer’s Dublin, (unintelligible) internet law
committee and on the IPC.

(Charlotte):

(Charlotte) (Unintelligible), I am (unintelligible) with Adams & Adams in South
Africa. I am IPC.

Susan Payne:

(Susan Payne) from Valideus. I am a member of the IPC and I also
participate in the registry stakeholder group on behalf of (unintelligible) and I
am one of the honorary legal (unintelligible) to the brand registry group.

(Heather Foust): (Heather Foust), I teach intellectual property at the University of Tasmania. I
am a member of the GNSO council for the IPC. I am the council lead for this
PDP II council, yeah.
John Nevett:

John Nevett (unintelligible) registry stakeholder group, former chair of the
registrar stakeholder group and the new TLD applicant group.

(Kurt Bert):

(Kurt Bert), formerly with ICANN and now a management consultant. I
worked with J. Scott and many of you on the implementation
recommendation team where we fashioned many of these rights protection
mechanisms we are talking about right now (unintelligible), and then worked
with the GNSO on implementing them.

J. Scott Evans:

We had one gentleman join us who got ahead of the queue so if you will
introduce yourself for us.

(Nassar Vitori):

Thank you very much, good morning. (Nassar Vitori), manager director of
Origin. Origin is an alliance of (unintelligible) groups and I am a member of
this working group. It’s my first time on the committee. Thank you.

J. Scott Evans:

Great. This is an open meeting for anyone who may be on the phone, which
means that it’s not just populated in the room here in Helsinki with members
of the working group. There are also observers here and just for the record

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 6

because we are trying to keep an accurate transparent record, I’m going to
have the observers introduce themselves as well so we all know. Please
understand as an observer as we are discussing issues, you are welcome to
make any comment and come to the microphone and speak either if you
want to come to the table and grab a microphone, if you want to go to the
standing mic that will be here, but we encourage your participation. We want
your participation. So Glen if we can start, thank you.
(Daniel Madden): (Daniel Madden) from (unintelligible) in Paris.
Woman:

(Unintelligible), from (unintelligible) Paris.

(Soriah Komite): (Soriah Komite), Holding levels, Paris.
(Jacob Williams): (Jacob Williams), Interlink.
(Damon Ashfap): (Damon Ashfap) with Snell and Womer in Phoenix, Arizona and I’m with the
IPC.
(Jennifer Scott):

(Jennifer Scott), contractual compliance.

(Maggie Surrad): Good morning everyone, (Maggie Surrad), contractual compliance.
Man:

Good morning, everyone.

Woman:

Good.

(Ally Alvadux):

And it’s (Ally Alvadux).

(Christine Alanti): (Christine Alanti), trademark express teamwork.
(Joanna Badden): Hi, (Joanna Badden), Gemini Lens, CCPLD (unintelligible).

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 7

Man:

(Unintelligible), from India, (unintelligible).

(Dana Bran):

(Dana Bran), Northcott, Amazon.com.

(Jennifer Bryant): (Jennifer Bryant), (unintelligible) U.K. Limited.
Woman:

(Unintelligible).

(Renville Strenusta): (Renville Strenusta).
Man:

(Unintelligible) with the Trademark (unintelligible) house.

Woman:

(Unintelligible), Trademark (unintelligible) house.

Man:

(Unintelligible) house.

(Celia Smith):

(Celia Smith) with Fox. I am also in the brand registry group and the B.C.

(Martin Fenton):

(Martin Fenton), brand registry group and member of the registry stakeholder
group.

(Selmin Franco): (Selmin Franco), in (unintelligible).
(Chuck Gomes): (Chuck Gomes), (unintelligible).
David McAuley:

David McAuley, Verisign.

Freida Tallon:

Freida Tallon, sky member of the registry stakeholder group.

(Stephen Modala):
Man:

(Stephen Modala), (unintelligible).

(Unintelligible).

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 8

Man:

(Unintelligible), JPRS.

Man:

(Unintelligible), JPRS.

(Emily Berbas):

(Emily Berbas), ICANN staff.

(Steve Chan):

(Steve Chan), ICANN staff.

(Brian Scarpelli): (Brian Scarpelli), ACTVF Association.
Man:

(Unintelligible).

(Susan Anthon): Thank you, (Susan Anthony), United States Patent and Trademark Office.
(Karen Month):

(Karen Month), ICANN staff. I also worked on implementing money of the
RPM’s in the program.

J. Scott Evans:

Mary?

Mary Wong:

Thanks, J. Scott. I’m not ready to introduce myself although I am Mary Wong
from ICANN staff, hello, and to acknowledge that we do have folks in remote
participation in the Adobe Connect Room who are not here and they include
a number of members and observers of our working group.

J. Scott Evans:

Thank you Mary, very much, if I can just quickly for those in the room,
everyone who is actually a member of the working group, would you please
raise your hand just so that we can get -- so it’s good to see that we have
such a good participation and to have so many people live at the meeting, I
think that shows how very important and historic the work that we are doing is
going to be and I am pleased to have you all here.
So, I think the first thing I would like to do is sort of report out that I don’t know
how many people attended the meeting we had on Monday afternoon where

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 9

we presented to the community about our work plan and how things were
going and how we’d set up things and that we had started with the PDDRP
and we had some discussion. We took some responses from the audience of
some additional issues and is it possible, David), to put up the .pdf that has -we extrapolated since Monday the listing of some of the things that came out
of that meeting so that we could show them to those of you that may not have
been there and David has put it in the .pdf. It was too large to put into our
deck.
So real quick, while we are going to concentrate in the second part of this
meeting on the actual PDDRP which is the first -- one of the things I wanted
to do was I wanted to go through the issues that we discussed and have
everyone look those over and see if there is anything that you feel that we
need to add to that list, is there something that needs to be subtracted from
that list? Are there things that we need to think of differently? So, let’s just go
through them subject by subject and look at them quickly. We see here we
have the trademark clearing house and the questions and comments that we
got were you see here does the trademark clearing house provide avenues
that are procedurally and substantively fair so effectively balanced the rights
of right holders versus normal internet users so we had a lot of comment and
discussion about the cost benefit analysis of the trademark clearing house. I
think there were some -- I want to say it may have been a registry
representative who is just saying, you know, it’s expensive for the registries to
have to participate and was the benefit really weighed, you know, out at least
balanced with the cost to the registry?
Does the trademark clearing house create a tendency to perpetuate the
status quo? How acceptable is the trademark clearing house to reviewing
accessibility for trademark agents in developing countries? Should the
trademark clearing house remain the single provider or should we open to
different providers that would have the centralize database? And I think that
previous question and this question are sort of connected. I think there was
some discussion in the room if I am remembering correctly that perhaps

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 10

having a single provider that only operates in English might cause problems
for different cultures that they don’t have as many people who speak English
and if you are forcing them to operate in English not only is expensive but it
might not be as useful for those purposes and so that was something they felt
we might want to consider.
There was a lot of focus on whether the trademark clearing house should
remain a single provider. Are the costs of the trademark clearing house rock
holders for ICANN for the community proportionate to the benefits? Again,
you see that question coming up. How do you determine what is a good
chilling effect and a bad chilling effect in relation of RPM’s? I mean, one of
the data points we have roughly is that there have been about a million
trademark claims notices went out that people didn’t then carry through with
the registration and I think there is some concern that maybe there were
people who were scared off from registering when they could have registered
but again I think there was also the point brought up that you don’t know for
sure, it could be the trademark clearing house actually is working as it was
intended and those million people had innocently made a mistake. Not
everybody is actually out to infringe on someone’s rights and realized that
and chose a different name. So we just don’t know and the question is we
may have to struggle with how to determine that or if that can even be
determined. Do you have a comment?
Man:

Yeah, well I was just going to -- have we gotten to the end of this?

J. Scott Evans:

Any time anyone wants to --

Man:

Well I was going to suggest we go through all of these up through the
trademark clearing house and take comments on the clearing house before
we go onto the next one so I don’t think we’ve quite --

J. Scott Evans:

And then we went through -- we were asking the group also, are there any
data points that you think we should consider? Because, you know, we had

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 11

an opportunity to sit in a room with a majority of people who have not
participated on any of our calls so they don’t know what we’ve been talking
about considering and we were, you know, just asking is there anything we
should look at? And here are some of the ideas that we put forth. It’s useful to
look at how many cases have helped existing right holders, how many cases
have helped internet users that do not own the rights at the time they come to
the trademark clearing house.
In relation to questions and procedure, for example, has procedure been
followed correctly in all cases? In the cases of deviations, why were the
deviations caused? Who were the deviations helping? How many domains
were registered to users that were not the registered claim holder that were
eventually challenged by the team CH claimholder and whose ownership was
then moved from the user that registered the domain to the claimholder, and
then it gives us an example.
So those are some of the things that we were asked that they thought we
should consider and data points we should look at. The question is if we can
find that data if it’s available, I’m not sure but now I’d open it up to the floor to
ask anyone if they have anything that they see here or is different or if they
have any idea where we might find some of this information, I’d just open it
up to the room.
Man:

Let me jump in with the first quick comment, two quick comments, one, we’ve
heard from quite a number of people about dissatisfaction with the cost, of
clearing house rate (unintelligible) and a desire to have multiple providers for
both cost and other reasons. We are going to have to, I think, if we can find
out what type of contracts ICANN is entered into with (unintelligible) and IBM,
the two current providers who share the duties of providing the current
clearinghouse. We don’t know if that’s an exclusive arrangement or what it
says on whether it’s possible under that contractual arrangement to have
other providers if we decide that’s a good idea.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 12

Also, on the good versus bad chilling effect, I do know because I asked the
folks doing the study when they spoke on it at Marrakesh that the current
study that’s been undertaken by ICANN in request to, in response to a
request that the GAC made several years ago, I asked point blank are you
going to be able to -- from what you’re doing to be able to tell us when there
was a good chilling effect when receipt of a claims notice deterred what
would have been an infringing registration versus an undesirable chilling
effect where someone who was going to register a generic dictionary word
with the intent to use it for a purpose totally unrelated to whatever it was
trademarked for was just spooked by the notice and didn’t go forward with the
registration.
And I think also to add one last, we have to remember that the vast majority
of domain registrants, you know, we live in this ICANN bubble and so many
of us, or trademark orders, or at least know a lot about trademark where we
have to remember that the millions of domain registrants, the vast majority
know nothing about intellectual property law and trademark and when they
get a notice like that their first thought could be I don’t understand this work
but it looks like I might get in trouble and I’d have to spend a lot of money to
consult with a trademark order to find out whether this registration is a good
idea. So, we have to keep the average user in mind and I’ll stop there and we
welcome other comments and thoughts.
J. Scott Evans:

Okay I see two hands. Before we get there, one of the things I want to put out
to the room and I’d ask the two people who are going to speak next to maybe
give their comment on what I’m about to say, but I’m speaking not as chair.
I’m speaking as J. Scott Evans from Adobe and just a person who has been
involved. I wonder if our job is necessarily to decide the issue with regards to
a single provider. I wonder if our issue is to recognize that that’s been brought
up and then bring that to the subsequent procedures working group and let
that be an issue that they deal with because it seems to me that that’s more
about implementation of the program rather than the rights protection
mechanism itself and it seems it might be slightly beyond our (unintelligible). I

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 13

do believe we should note it and say in our report that it was -- we heard it
repeatedly but I don’t know if we should delve into that issue any broader
than making a note and then have our, make sure our liaisons from that
group take it back and then ask them to specifically address it. That would be
my -- I don’t know how controversial I’m being but that would be my thought.
I’m seeing Ellen Shankman and then I saw Jeff, do I see any other hands real
quick, and (Kirk).
Ellen Shankman: The kind of -- I’d like to make J. Scott I think goes directly to what you are
saying and support it which is they are the “what” questions which is what are
you trying to achieve, what needs need to be met and then there are the
“how” questions and every “how” has its pluses and minuses and I think it
would be unfortunate to get bogged down in the best house to fix things even
though I think this working group is intended to make better “hows” and to
first be asking the questions of -- and then when these mechanisms were first
set up there were certain needs identified.
And this was an attempt to address those needs and maybe it was successful
and maybe it could be more successful and maybe it wasn’t. But, I think it is
important to look and see did this address the needs that were there and are
there any other needs that have since been identified that need addressing
because to otherwise argument about well, this thing could be a little bit
tweaked this way, it’s more expensive, less expensive, somebody else takes
(unintelligible) provider net, I think is to lose the opportunity to see whether or
not this is doing what it should be doing and what we thought it should be
doing when we wrote these whatever a number of years ago, have those
needs been addressed and have new needs come up that should be
addressed?
J. Scott Evans:

Thanks so much. Just a reminder, please state your name for the transcript
record because we do have people participating remotely and if they want to
respond to you I’d like them to be able to know who they are responding to,
so if you’d just say your name, I’d appreciate it.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 14

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks, this is Jeff Neuman. I think (Ellen), you said a lot of what I was going
to say, (unintelligible) respond to (Phil), the agreements with the clearing
house providers are actually posted. They are online. I could send around a
link to where they are. There are some parts that are redacted but I think for
the most part there was an exclusivity period. I’m not sure yet if that’s expired
or if it was based on instead of the time period it might have been based on a
number of registrations but I do agree that, you know, you all should look at
the concept and the principles and then pass it on either to -- not even
necessarily the subsequent procedures but to implementation. Whether that’s
the subsequent procedures or an IRT on that is a whole other question.

J. Scott Evans:

Thanks, Jeff, just real quick, I have a question for the room because Ellen
Shankman raised the question of we need to answer the “what,” right? How
many people have read the original IRT report to know what that group
thought they were trying to solve? So, I suggest that everyone on this
committee read that report so you understand what they were trying to solve
because you are not going to understand the “what” if you don’t look at the
report and try to understand what they were trying to solve. I know there is so
much hyperbole in this community that a lot of it gets distorted and goodly
and badly. I’m not -- but you just go to the root of what we are talking about
so when we begin to answer that question, you understand what they were
trying to answer. So, I would implore all of you to read that report and I
believe you can find it on the ICANN website. Mary, I would ask that you put
a link to that in an email after this meeting so that everybody can find it easily.
And with that, I will turn to (Kirk).

(Kirk):

It’s sort of getting back to what (Ellen) says but when you talk about a cost
and you are worrying about a cost being too high, there are two elements to
that and one is the price given to us by the bidder but the more important
aspect is what he or she is asked to bid on and I think what -- a good test for
this group more than the subsequent procedures group is to look at the scope
of the clearing house and because we were being careful then and we

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 15

wanted certain aspects of the implementation there and look and see which
ones added value and which ones did not and a more effective way to reduce
cost is really to reduce scope.
J. Scott Evans:

Thanks (Kirk), I think I saw (Susan Payne) raise her hand.

Susan Payne:

Yes, I wanted to make a comment on the bullet point #3 on the data to be
gathered, just because I’m one of the people who volunteered to work on that
stay together and exercise and I don’t want us to go down the wrong track
slightly. I don’t think that specific data is particularly useful for us in this
particular context because you don’t need a trademark in the trademark
clearing house to bring a UDRP and the only complaint that would allow you
to recover the domain name is the UDRP. So, that information in terms of
successful or unsuccessful UDRP’s is definitely relevant when we are
reviewing the UDRP but I don’t think complaining the two is particularly
helpful for us so there may be data that is relevant for us to gather around
numbers of claims and what the impacts of those claims were (unintelligible)
people but I don’t think it’s relevant for us to complain that whether a UDRP
was successful or not.

J. Scott Evans:

I think Brian, I saw your hand, does anyone else have -- okay.

Brian Beckham:

Thank you J. Scott, Brian Beckham for the record, I wanted to just ask the
question to follow on (Susan)’s comments if this working group has thought
yet about who to canvas for feedback for this, so should we for example
reach out to the international trademark association to canvas members the
intended beneficiaries? We heard in the earlier session some important
feedback from registries and registrars in terms of the cost and the
operational pain so I think it would also be equally important to somehow
reach out to the intended beneficiaries to trademark owners. I also know that
the governmental advisory committee has expressed an interest many years
ago to look at the trademark clearing house once it was operational so those

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 16

are two avenues maybe the working group wants to look into in terms of
outreach going forward.
J. Scott Evans:

Thank you. Our data gathering subgroup, I would put to you, perhaps we
want to develop some sort of mechanism that we could use at many different
(unintelligible) but do the same type questions. We could agree on it, this
whole group would agree you all would just develop it and maybe we do it to
marks and ECTA and INTA and maybe the registry stakeholder group as
well, the registrars, we gather data from everyone so I would say -- I would
put that to the group, (Susan), that you are working with to think about that,
whether we want to survey those different groups and do, you know, a very
similar survey for everyone. I have a hand here and then a -- okay, and then
Mary.

Man:

Yes, I’m (Unintelligible) for the records. During the working group discussion
we had a debate whether we should consider any single mechanism or
district resolution in isolation or we should consider them in connection if
specifically we do the DRP and actually one of the questions I asked and I’d
like maybe to see it reflected in the question is what kind of consequence
should we draw from the fact that (unintelligible) indications have been
admitted in the trademark clearing house under the item marked, protected
on the treaties and statutes. I think this is quite important because once we
have -- once you recognize some identity to this legal instrument to be
admitted in the clearing house, I think it will be interesting to consider and
discuss whether there should be any consequence in terms of allowing GI’s
also to be a legal titre, to activate a UDRP, I think it’s very interesting to
discuss it in this framework, I think, this you know, in some instances it might
be also a theoretical question in the sense that many geographical indications
are protected in some jurisdictions as well as trademark, so practically they
could activate any way the UDRP but I think it would be important also to
have a debate on that because otherwise it would be a little bit limiting, you
know, to accept into the (unintelligible) but not to give the possibility then to
solve (unintelligible) registered as second level domains by an entity which is

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 17

not relation with -- and let’s remember, let’s remind you that GI’s are
intellectual property rights, recognized by the (unintelligible) agreement.
Thank you.
J. Scott Evans:

A couple of things, first of all the EDOP and the trademark clearing house are
not connected in any way. Just so we all understand. They are not connected
in any way. You can bring a UDRP and never even consider, know about,
have discussed, have anything to do with the trademark clearing house first.
Second, I want to give everyone just a brief history.
When we first conceptualized on the IRT, the trademark clearing house, it
was not called the trademark clearing house. It was just called the centralized
database and the original idea was it would just be a centralized database
that would collect rights information and that the registries would determine
based on the jurisdiction which they sat in, what rights they wanted to protect
under their laws. So for instance, in Germany titles to books are given the
same rights as a trademark. They are not in the United States unless they are
series of books that show good will, right?
So, in U.S. you couldn’t protect a title, in Germany you could, but if I was a
German registry and I wanted to protect titles, I could and all the trademark
clearing house would do is collect that data in one central place and any
German registry that wanted to protect that would ping and get that
information. But somehow it got conflated that we were trying to create
trademark rights for things that didn’t have trademark rights and so they kept
narrowing it down and it ended up just being trademarks, not common-law
marks, not geographic indications, not other things, because they thought we
were trying to create rights that didn’t exist and I think that is where it got
changed.
But that was not the original concept. The original concept was just to collect
data and let a registry choose what they were going to protect and all the
database would do is take in the data so that the owner only had to go to one

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 18

place to do it rather than 50 different registries to figure out what was going
on. So that was the original concept and I think there was some concern that
by creating this they were going to create rights outside of different countries
that would make people concerned and so that’s where some of that came
and we can discuss that but there are a lot of people, since you haven’t
(unintelligible) would say, we really don’t want to go back and rehash issues
that have already been decided by the community so I just put that out for
everyone. I see Nick’s hand, then Phil’s hand.
Nick Wood:

Just a quick addition to that, I think in those early days and we have
designed what we are talking about, we referred to it as a cost reduction
mechanism for mark owners to participate in an unknown number of sunrises
in the future. It wasn’t actually referred to by if it’s a rights protection
mechanism and it became much more complicated when it came out and one
of my concerns about the current model is how it would scale if we have
10,000 applications in the next round because certainly most of my clients
don’t want to get claims from 10,000 registries.

J. Scott Evans:

I think, Phil? Say your name for the record.

Philip Corwin:

I wanted to raise a question for you and the group -- of the right RPM’s, but
my question relates to what about infringement, infringing activities that have
actually arisen that are not susceptible to any of them, one of, specifically
thinking about is every couple of days I review the junk mail folder of my
Outlook and it is full of emails from new TLD’s. I’m not going to but there
seemed to be a certain new TLD that is very attractive to spammers and in
the domain name, the domain name is complete nonsense. It looks like a
computer generated nonsensical domain name with letters and numbers and
so it wouldn’t be picked up by the clearing house. It wouldn’t be susceptible to
UDRP or URS. The infringement is going on in the subject line which refers to
a very well-known corporation.
Now, when you look at the actual email, some of them pretty transparently

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 19

phony, but some of them, particularly the ones that relate to financial
institutions and social media, are very sophisticated and can fool a lot of
people into thinking it is from their bank or it is something to do with their
social media account and I don’t know, I don’t think it’s within our charter but
what should ICANN generally do about that type of infringing phishing activity
that has arisen using certain new TLD’s that’s really not covered by any of the
RPMs?
We’re not really chartered to think about new RPMs, but I just wanted to raise
that question of what about things we’ve noticed about troubling uses of
some new TLDs that aren’t covered by any of the RPMs?
J. Scott Evans:

Anyone have – my personal belief – this is J. Scott Evans speaking as
someone who’s been at ICANN and as a – doubly not as trying to persuade
anyone – way – one way or the other is those are issues that we should note.
And I think we should probably say that we – well whether we believe or we
don’t believe they’re inside or outside ICANN’s ambit, because I think what
happens is then the GAC or somebody then needs to understand that that’s a
problem that we don’t think ICANN can fix, but it’s a problem that needs to be
fixed and then maybe the local jurisdictions or the local governments need to
fix it.
And I think we have to identify those if we stumble across them but I don’t
think we can create new things that are outside of the ambit. And I wonder
since we’re the domain name administrator if we can start dealing with
infringement that happens in a subject line.

Philip Corwin:

And I may agree with that. I, you know, certainly you had a – went into a
meeting and there’s hundreds of exhibitors and there’s many, many
competitors out there providing very sophisticated tools for trademark owners
to – that can pick up that kind of spam activity.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 20

So it may be completely outside ICANN’s remit but it, you know, at least it –
but it does relate to, you know, unhappy uses of some new TLDs and we
should always note it and decide what if anything we should do whether it’s
just something that the private sector has to deal with.
J. Scott Evans:

I think Mary had something from the remote.

Mary Wong:

Actually there’s couple of remote participants but it relates to an earlier point
and goes back to your question J. Scott and Ellen and Jeff’s comments
earlier about whether some of the questions that have been raised are indeed
within the scope of this policy-based working group, or whether it’d be more
appropriate to be referred to another policymaking group such as the new
gTLD subsequent procedures or even moved to implementation.
The comment is from George Kirikos who disagrees with Ellen and with Jeff
because he says that, “If for example that that could mean that other groups
could be making the so-called tweaks to the UDRP or the URS, that might
more appropriately be done by this group.
And if there are going to be changes they should be very explicit and not
leave it to some other PDP or working group.” And then there was some
subsequent discussions between George and Jeff on this in the Adobe chat.

J. Scott Evans:

Jeff did I see your hand go up?

Jeff Neuman:

Thanks. This is Jeff Neuman. I actually didn’t want to respond to that
particular point. I wanted to respond to Phil. I think the issue you’re referring
to Phil is actually an issue not just with new gTLDs, but I would think it is also
a huge issue with gTLDs in general and ccTLDs.
So I would hate to note it when dealing with just new TLDs without a full
understanding of the entire problem, but I do think that that’s way beyond this
group anyway.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 21

I’m not going to say it’s beyond ICANN. I don’t want to get into that whole
mess but it’s certainly beyond the remit of this group.
J. Scott Evans:

I – we have one gentleman before you (Ellen) and then we will come to you.

(Brian Tamal):

Yes (Brian Tamal) with PIR. Just to Phil’s point I do think while it might be
outside this group’s focus I think it – what you’re describing sounds a lot like
spam or phishing and that would be technical abuse that should be covered
under Spec 11.3(b).
It’s – I think it’s covered under ICANN but not necessarily this group’s remit.
Ellen?

Ellen Shankman: To address – to respond to those comments I’m not saying what is
appropriate for – or do I think this group should spend a lot of time thinking
this isn’t a remit or not.
I would just encourage people to not put the cart before the horse, which is
first focus on what the problems are, figure out what the needs are, figure out
what needs are being addressed or not.
If we can address them address them and if we can’t at least as you say
identify them as needs that are going unaddressed so that people understand
that the needs remain.
J. Scott Evans:

Okay are – is there anyone else that has a comment on the Trademark
Clearinghouse data they think we should gather, who we should gather data
from, issues they think we should consider? Anyone?
Okay and Susan what I heard come out of this discussion – the only
takeaway I’m hearing is to consider perhaps a data – some sort of survey or

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 22

something to gather data from different groups that your group should
discuss and consider.
That’s the only takeaway. I mean, am I correct in the room? Am I – that’s the
only takeaway I’m really hearing. Susan.
Susan Payne:

Well I – as – I have one more which is, you know, we know there’s an
independent review of the Trademark Clearinghouse underway and I know
they’ve reached out to various people and asked for various information and
say, “I don’t want us to be duplicating some work that’s already been done.”
So we clearly need to communicate with them I would say.

J. Scott Evans:

I would ask that we set up a call with our data gathering group and this
independent review group, and have them have a discussion together that
they would then report back to the whole group.
I think if we keep it small they’ll get more – it’ll be a more robust and fruitful
discussion and then they can come back and report back to us what you find
out as part of your data gathering.
Susan does that make you more comfortable? I’m seeing – okay I see Lori
and then I’m going to move us on after that okay? Lori?

Lori Schulman:

Lori Schulman for the record. I want to respond to your two suggestions
about surveying institutions generally. INTA has already been asked by the
CCT group to do a survey to our members in terms of the costs of defensively
living in this space.
So if your group is considering reaching out to indirect or most any of the
groups, I think it would be really helpful to those group representatives to
maybe work on consolidating the requests, because I think what will happen
institutionally – there’s some wear and tear on members in terms of survey.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 23

So in order to really help the community in general perhaps it might be a
good idea that we all sat down to think about what we might want and include
them in surveys that are – might already be planned and get it done sooner
rather than later.
J. Scott Evans:

Lori could I call upon you to reach out to our data gathering group and sort of
let them know who you’ve already talked to about surveys so that we can do
some coordination on that level? Would that be good?

Lori Schulman:

That would be wonderful.

J. Scott Evans:

Great. With that I’m going to move us on to look at the trademark claims
notice. You see here we got two points out of there. For Registrars
implementing trademark claims these currently have limited and very low
validity period that affect this to prevent some of the marking activities that
usually are performed by Registrars.
I’m not sure – completely understand this but I think some people – I think
this relates to the issue of people farming the Trademark Clearinghouse
information to use that for their own purposes beyond that for which it was
designed.
Is - that sort of seem what they’re talking about there? I think I’ve heard some
people did things like looked in the Trademark Clearinghouse and then put
those on a list and then they charge expensive premium for.
They sort of use the information from – for things it was not designed for and I
think that’s what that bullet point’s trying to get to but I’m not sure. The
working group should talk to Registrars and maybe even like track down
users who have been – who have seen the notice and ask them their reaction
to it.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 24

And I just want to say for the group – Brett if you would repeat what you said
to us on Monday up at the dais so that the whole group can know what your
experience is and what you’ve offered for us.
Brett Fausett:

Hi Brett Fausett, Registry. I went to Dot Mom back in May and I was telling J.
Scott at the session the other day that we had reached out to prominent mom
bloggers to see if they would be interested in, you know, registering their
name in Dot Mom and helping us promote it.
And we found – I think one of the examples we had was Swoon had
stylemom.com and we said, you know, “Would you like style.mom?” And she
said, “It’s great. That’d be wonderful. That’s actually perfect for me.”
And then we showed her the claims notice and she freaked out and we – so,
you know, told her we couldn’t offer legal advice but, you know, this is what
the purpose was.
And eventually she took the name but yes that’s the kind of – and that was a
first hand reaction of someone, you know, sitting with them while they saw
that claims notice and they thought it was a – some sort of legal demand.
It had a – for someone who’s not a – in the law business it can be a
intimidating thing to see. You don’t know what it is. It’s not something you’re –
even if you’ve registered a name before it’s not something you typically see.
So I think that we ought to perhaps think about a – maybe a softer way of
presenting the information.

J. Scott Evans:

I would suggest that that might be something and I would – and when we get
to this – covering this issue I had planned to ask Jeff Neuman to give us a
presentation on how they had run it in Dot Biz, which is where trademark
claims notice originally came from.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 25

So we could talk about it and see how it was originally conceptualized and to
see if it’s gotten so complicated that it’s not really serving the same purpose.
But we’ll get to that but I think that’s a good point and I think that’s a good
illustration of how sometimes good things can go bad, because I personally
think that what happened is we’re trying to give them so much good
information that it actually has the negative effect but that’s my personal
opinion. I saw Jeff’s hand go up.
Jeff Neuman:

Yes I’m – I think the bullet point – sorry Jeff Neuman. The bullet point on the
low validity periods is partially related to marketing but it’s also partially
related to not having Registrars have a default acceptance anytime someone
looks up that name.
So I think the main point is I think there are some technical issues with the
trademark claims and sunrise and how Registries and Registrars interact with
the – with IBM for the database part of the TNCH not the validators, that
either this group can break into a technical track or it could be referred to
subsequent procedures to break onto a technical track.
But I think there definitely are some issues that were brought up. I can’t
remember if it was the face-to-face meeting we had or a call where there
were some technical issues that were brought up on what it’s like to have a
centralized provider versus the decentralized solution that was originally
proposed and how this encryption and the keys work and all of that.
I definitely think there is a technical track that we should create like I said
either in this PDP or in the subsequent procedures that can tackle those
types of issues.

J. Scott Evans:

Jeff could I call upon you to take that bullet point and sort of turn it into like a
little executive summary of some of the technical issues so that when we get
to this – when we get to it on our work plan that’s one of the first things we
can consider?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 26

But I think this sort of assumes a lot of things and has a lot of assumptions
built into it. If you’d break it down for us knowing that many of us are not
technicians so that we have a better understanding so we go to discuss it we
can decide whether we’re going to push it, whether we’re going to do a
technical track or whatever. Can I call upon you to do that for us?
Thank you. I think we have someone online that has a comment and then I
see Phil’s hand’s up.
Mary Wong:

We have another comment from George Kirikos in this chat in Adobe and I it
relates both to the earlier data gathering point as well as the current
discussion on trademark claims.
His comment is that, “It’s probably more effective to collect data now rather
than later and that it probably is possible. If for example a prospective
Registrant decides not to register a domain name due to a trademark notice,
the best means to understand that decision is to collect the data at the time
such as by the Registrar or some independent party.
We would of course need some cooperative Registrars who would be willing
to implement that into their registration path today.” So that’s George’s
comment.
And if I may add a comment from the Staff side that J. Scott you mentioned
earlier that there was some liaisons between this PDP Working Group and
the PDP Working Group on new gTLD subsequent procedures.
…Payne and I see Susan in the room so that’s one means that this group is
coordinating with other efforts. And on top of that I wanted to mention that
internally amongst the Staff we also have a coordination group of sorts and
we meet very regularly, and we are being coordinated at the moment by
Karen Lentz who is in the room as well.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 27

J. Scott Evans:

Thank you. Phil?

Philip Corwin:

No actually I’m glad Mary brought that up. I want to – I also had noticed
George’s comment and wanted to speak to it. I thought it was useful in that,
you know, if someone – now if someone has an existing relationship with a
Registrar and logs in where they know the customer, you could go to them
after the fact if they begin a registration and don’t complete it after receiving a
claims notice.
But in the vast majority of cases somebody goes to GoDaddy or eNom or
some Registrar and does a search for a name they’re interested in and sees
it’s available and starts the registration.
Claims notice pops up and they disengage and there’s no way for that
Registrar to have any idea who that is so - to go back to them. So if there is a
way for Registrars to build into that process some way when someone – to
put up a popup that says, “If you decide,” you know, to accompany the claims
notice saying, “If you’re – if you are weary of this we have an information
page or would you be willing to answer questions about why you didn’t
complete the registration?”
That might be useful because for most potential Registrants there’s not going
to be any way once they leave the Registrar Web site to ever know who they
were if they haven’t completed the registration.

J. Scott Evans:

I – this is J. Scott speaking as a guy who deals with e-commerce platform
providers as my client and has to try to get them to put all the legal stuff at the
payment page.
And I can tell you that most e-commerce gurus would tell you that is a
sticking point they don’t want to add to their checkout process, but that would
just be – well…

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 28

Philip Corwin:

Just to counter that though I think if you’re a Registrar and if you’re losing a
completely valid registration because someone misunderstands the notice or
is just spooked by the possibility of violation trademark law, it would be in
your interest to try to gather that information and try to provide some
explanation.

J. Scott Evans:

Okay. Then I would say to Susan and the data gathering group if we might
reach out to some Registrars to see if they might be willing to participate in
some data gathering of that methodology. So that’s a takeaway I’m getting
from that. I see Beth.

Beth Allegretti:

Beth Allegretti. Is it possible to change the wording of the notice and if so who
would do that?

J. Scott Evans:

We would and that’s something…

Beth Allegretti:

Okay. Right. We would…

((Crosstalk))
J. Scott Evans:

…that we’ll consider when we get there but I think we need to get some data
gathered just to ensure. Brett?

Brett Fausett:

Yes I think on the data gathering you would want to know the percentage of
people who back out of their cart when presented with a claims notice versus
the people who back out of their cart just normally, because you need both
figures to see if there’s a difference.

J. Scott Evans:

Okay Susan did you hear that that we need to get - one of the data points is
probably the percentage of people who back out of their cart – their shopping
cart once they’re presented with a notice versus the number of people who
just back out of their cart?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 29

Jeff Neuman:

And some people do it anyway.

J. Scott Evans:

Right. All right. So I’m going to – (Nick).

(Nick):

Just a quick point. There are some people I think from the Clearinghouse
here. Shall we ask them what data they might be able to give us easily that
would be helpful?

J. Scott Evans:

I am happy to do that but I don’t think I want to do that today. I do want to
reach out to them at some point and I think our data gathering group should
reach out to them and ask them that question, because I want to move us on
so that we can take our coffee break and then come back and delve into the
PDDRP.
So Susan if we can just, you know, have the group reach out to the
Trademark Clearinghouse providers and find out what type of information
they can provide to us.

Susan Payne:

Just as a point of clarity I’m not the chair of that group or anything. It’s – I’m
not actually sure who’s on the group but yes I’m sure once we all get together
we’ll do that.

J. Scott Evans:

Okay. I just keep pointing to you because you’ve done that. I’m not trying to
make you chair, but if somehow since you’re here when you all do discuss if
you would bring these things forward to them. Okay thank you.
Then let’s move on to the Uniform Rapid Suspension System. Your
consideration should be given to how to convert a URS to a UDRP. I’ll put the
trademark owner first in line when the suspension is lifted or have some
mechanism to get someone the name that they want after they’ve won the
URS.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 30

And for those of you that may have not been there Monday let me put this
into context. I think it was a Registry operator who stated that they’ve had
situations where the true owner of a name has been successful in the URS.
But because of the way it’s written and the way it is implemented they cannot
then give it to the rightful owner and they want to but they can’t. They’re
prevented from doing so and this is a frustration both for the party who filed
the URS, and for the Registry who really wants to get it into the hand of the
proper owner. So that’s that point there. Beth.
Beth Allegretti:

Beth Allegretti. I think that’s the key point with the URS is getting that name –
being sure that you can get that name back. I know that a lot of businesses
don’t use it just for that reason. I think that’s key.

J. Scott Evans:

Yes ma’am.

(Annabeth Polovich): (Annabeth Polovich) representing (MSSID) and one of the URS provider
and this is one of the question that we receive after the districts are
concluded.
So this is the first teammate I received the next day after the determination.
What can we do to get the domain name?
J. Scott Evans:

Two hands here and then I see a hand there and then I see this one and then
I see Brian so we’ll go with Denise for…

Denise Michel:

Just quickly Denise Michel with Facebook. I just wanted to support and
underscore Beth Allegretti’s comments. Not being able to get the name back
after the URS is a significant impediment for using that service.

J. Scott Evans:

Yes sir.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 31

Maxim Alzoba:

Yes Maxim Alzoba for the record. Actually there are two things which might
be useful to be clarified for the end users of the URS – yes potential users.
So nobody reads the frequently asked questions on the URS provider site
unfortunately and they do not – most people do not know that you can file
more than one name, more than ten names actually the one time.
And they do not read the line in the very bottom. “If you want to keep the
name consider UDRP.”

J. Scott Evans:

Ellen and then Brian and then Phil and then Mary.

Ellen Shankman: Ellen Shankman. I think more than any of the other rights protection
mechanisms the URS is the one that I think would benefit most from meeting
what’s the mentor that will identify it at the time, including being that many
brand owners did not want to get their – that domain name and wanted a
procedure that didn’t have it and what eventually happens with the URS and
how it got that through.
I mean, I think that that of all of them had the biggest gap between identifying
the needs that needed to be met and how it eventually played out, and I think
that that one would be the best to see whether or not the needs that were
identified then and the needs that have been identified since then can be met
by an approved URS.
J. Scott Evans:

Okay I think Brian’s hand and then Phil and then (Mar) and I saw Petter.

Brian Beckham:

Thank you. Brian Beckham for the record. Just to dovetail in what Ellen said I
think one of the questions - if we’re asking how to quote convert the UDR –
the URS into a UDRP in terms of the transfer remedy, one of the questions
we ought to be asking is is there a point at which we can be asking too much
of the URS?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 32

And going back to Ellen’s comment the original intent was that this was a
complement to the existing UDRP where a trademark owner can get the transfer a domain name into a – into its portfolio.
Some brand owners want that. Some would rather not hold defensive
registration portfolios. Around the time when the rights protection
mechanisms were being first introduced for discussion, WIPO also introduced
a proposal for a very unfriendly URS whereby if there was no response,
which we see in almost 80% of cases, is there a need to appoint the panel to
render a decision or could the domain name simply be suspended like you
have in the DMCA context with appropriate safeguards where Registrants
maybe haven’t received notice because it goes into their spam box or they’re
on vacation?
So the question really is what is the intended function of the URS? Is it meant
to replace the UDRP in which case that opens up a very big discussion, or is
it meant to complement the UDRP as a more narrowly tailored rights
protection mechanism?
J. Scott Evans:

It’s funny you read my mind because I was going to throw out to the group
not for discussion today but what I think is the elephant in the room. If you
had a default judgment - for those not in the United States if you had a
judgment that was issued basically by the provider when there’s no response
filed, they just resolve the case and then resulted in money being returned
because there’s not a full case done.
Some money would be returned to the complainant. Would there even be a
need for a URS? Okay. So I just put that out there for when we get to think
about it and we start – because we’re doing the URS right before we do the
UDRP and there’s - a reason for that is because they are the - closely
complemented.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 33

But that’s what I put out to you to think about over the next year as we get
closer to that. If there was a default judgment that acted as an expedited,
cheaper way for trademark owners to win in the UDRP would there even be a
need for a URS? And then I think it’s Phil and Mary and Petter. Yes and then
we’ll go to the Forum.
Philip Corwin:

Thank you. Phil Corwin and I’m speaking now in a personal capacity that’s
informed by my experience within ICANN and the BC and INTA and also with
Council to the Internet Commerce Association who are professional domain
investors.
This is worked out. It’s Uniform Rapid Suspension, not Uniform Rapid
Transfer. It doesn’t mean we can’t think about transfer again or at least first
dibs to purchase at end of registration period.
There’s different ways to do this and different consideration - one that I’ve
suggested and that’s gain some support within the Business Constituency
that if it’s not a generic term at issue, one that might be used for infringing or
non-infringing purposes but one that’s microsoft.com, google.com, there’s,
you know, it’s not – I shouldn’t say Dot Com.
It’s Microsoft or Google Dot New TLD and there’s almost no way you can
think that it could be used for any amount - infringing uses except by the
trademark owner.
Maybe it should just be taken – shouldn’t be available for reregistration, that
is the trademark owner doesn’t have to require it and pay perpetual defensive
registration costs and they’re not going to see it registered, you know, and
have to bring another URS or UDRP.
And maybe there’s a good case to make that if they want to acquire it that
they should have first dibs but we have to be – there have to be safeguards
because I know from the trademark owner’s side there’s nothing they hate

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 34

more than someone registering a new TLD for $0 or 5 cents, and then they
have to spend $500 on a URS or $1500 on a UDRP filing fee plus attorney’s
costs to stop just blatant infringement.
I know from the domain investor side there’s nothing that drives them crazier
than having a domain that they’re using in a non-infringing way and
somebody – and it’s registered ten years before a trademark.
And then somebody registers it for a trademark for something else and offers
them some money, and it maybe that he think is insufficient and they have no
interest in selling a domain and then they’re hit with a UDRP, and they have
to spend money on attorney’s fees fighting a hijacking attempt.
So we don’t – I know from the Registrant – professional Registrant side they
don’t want to see URS turned into a quick and cheap way to attempt domain
hijacking.
And we’re going to have to keep the balance and keep a fair system for both
sides because one question we’re going to have to deal with down the road,
and I think we have discretion whether we deal with it at the end of Phase 1
or in Phase 2, is whether URS or any of these other RPMs should become
consensus policy and applicable to the big legacy TLDs.
So I just wanted to get those thoughts out there. I’m open to anything but we
just have to keep reasonable safeguards and a balance between the rights of
trademark owners and Registrants as we consider changes. Thank you.
J. Scott Evans:

And Mary.

Mary Wong:

Thank you J. Scott. This is Mary from the Staff. There are comments from
George Kirikos and I’d like to follow them up with a note from Staff as well. So
George has a comment on this thread of the conversation.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 35

He disagrees with the transfer of the name because as he’s noted that this
would then replace the UDRP, and he notes further that the protection for
Registrants in a UDRP are not present in the URS.
Further he also notes that due process demands that a review should still be
done even when there’s no response, because all too often Registrants are
not properly served with a URS notice.
And he notes that we should take a look at how often extensions of time are
asked at the U.S. PTO or in court. His final comment on this point is how
would trademark owners like it if one could cancel their mark for $100 filing
fee of limited evidence?
J. Scott Evans:

Okay I think it would…

Mary Wong:

Can I follow with a Staff note? Just a very brief note that into – in relation to
this suggestion from Monday that you see on your screen, the list of topics for
our working group that is in our charter does touch on this, as well as part of
a broader question about whether the URS should allow for additional
remedies or other remedies such as the transfer or right of first refusal.

J. Scott Evans:

Great. Petter?

Petter Rindforth: Petter Rindforth. First of all I think we have to have in mind that it’s a Rapid
Suspension System. It’s – so it’s important to keep the UDRP and the URS
aside.
They’re two different kind of systems which is different kind of objects. And
even if the transfer in the URS is not possible also think about when the
domain name is suspended.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 36

There is on the Web site - there was connected to that – there’s a new site
getting up stating that this site is suspended and then there’s a short
information about the URS system.
So it’s not just that you can’t find the domain name or the Web site. It’s
actually informing that this has been a misuse of this domain name in a
certain way.
And for some time that’s what you see when you search for it. And I think
might get – I’d just like a quick – go through the difference between the
UDRP and the URS.
I saw the initial questions here but I think also it’s important I remind that with
a URS the burden of proof is clear and convincing evidence. It’s rather a little
bit a higher level than for the UDRP.
And when it comes to the UDRP the complaint word limits is 5000 words.
With the URS with the clear and convincing evidence it’s 500 so that means –
well of course for employers it should be a good experience to be more
clearer and then put away some of the discussion parts of our evidence.
But it’s a little bit contradictive in this way and so I think we should be very
clear about the URS system as a whole and also the very – the short time
limits to make a decision and us having in mind that panelists for both these
kind of dispute resolutions process – we go through the whole case.
We don’t just look just because there’s no reply from the domain holder. We
order a transfer or we order a stop. We go through all the comments and you
can also see from the URS cases that most – each one and every one is
definitely when it comes to the first phase are decided on behalf of the
complainant.
J. Scott Evans:

Okay I think Petter Rindforth had a comment.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 37

Petter Rindforth: Yes thank you J. Scott. This is Petter Rindforth from Forum. Related to the
same subject we are getting some questions between the URS and UDRP
and to how – as they – they’re currently written how they interact with each
other.
I don’t think there is anything in the procedures currently that prevent a UDRP
filing after a successful URS suspension. So as a provider we can’t really
prevent the trademark owners from filing a UDRP, but if they do get a
favorable decision in the UDRP while the URS suspension is still in place the
interaction between the Registrar, the Registry and the decisions between the
URS and UDRP become fairly complicated.
And so the working group could set – shed some light for all of us I think: the
providers, Registry and Registrars and – as to how to handle the URS and
UDRP in conjunction with each other as they’re currently written. Thanks.
J. Scott Evans:

I think that’s a excellent point because as a member of the IRT I can tell you
one of the things we thought was, “Well if you really want the name you could
still bring the UDRP.”
But then I think when it got to implementation nobody told the Registrars and
Registries exactly what they should do in the event that happened. And so I
think that’s the point you’re making is if we decide they can be used
conjunctively, we need to help out the Registrars and Registries with some
implementation ideas of how to make that work fluidly so that we know what
the communities expect. That’s what I’m hearing from you. Is that correct?

Petter Rindforth: Exactly and I think recently we are seeing a couple of cases that are currently
going through that process. It will be interesting to see how it all pans out.
J. Scott Evans:

It would be great if as – when we get to this if those have been resolved if you
would share that with us as a case study please.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 38

Petter Rindforth: Yes. Sure. Absolutely. Thanks.
J. Scott Evans:

I have Phil’s hand and then I saw Jon Nevett’s hands.

Philip Corwin:

Yes. Two quick comment and - on URS and the administration. The Uniform
applies to uniform administration. It means that no matter which dispute
resolution provider you pick it should basically be the same result at the end.
It shouldn’t – we want folks to pick the provider based on convenience or
they’re dealing in a language that another one doesn’t deal with or something
like that.
We don’t want forum shopping based on different qualitative treatment. I think
we also need as we’re gathering data in advance of our URS review to look
at if the providers have been sticking to the standard.
The standard is they have to find that there’s been bad faith registration and
use by clear and convincing evidence. From what I’ve seen, and I don’t look
at every URS decision, I think the vast majority of decisions they’re sticking to
it.
But I also have to say I’ve seen a few decisions where I wasn’t so sure it was
a black and white case. It was more kind of shades of gray that maybe
should’ve been sent to the UDRP.
And I’ve seen one or two where there was no use of a domain and yet there
was a decision against the Registrant. So I think we want to look at if it’s
been, you know, the providers are enforcing the cases as per the prescribed
evidentiary standard and if not well what ICANN – I know there’s an MOU
between ICANN and all the providers but we don’t know.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 39

Just like we want to see contractual compliance with Contracted Parties,
Registrars and Registrars we want to see some compliance effort if a dispute
resolution provider is getting off the reservation on how they enforce an RPM.
Thanks.
J. Scott Evans:

John.

Jonathan Nevett: Thanks J. Scott. Jon Nevett from Donuts. Just want to respond to Petter. The
thinking when we drafted the URS back in the day on the IRT and
subsequently in the FTI was that the standard would be exactly the same.
You have to prove the same thing between URS and a UDRP, but the burden
of proof was different. The burden of proof, as you mentioned, is clear and
convincing for a URS.
And the reason for that was we were looking at, and (Alan) always liked using
the term slam-dunk cases, we wanted a quick, easy way to take down a case
of infringement for a slam-dunk case. So if you can't say it in 500 words,
thinking was if you can't say it in 500 words maybe it's not a slam-dunk case,
maybe it's not what we intended for the URS. So the thought was, you know,
do a quick takedown, cheap, fast, easy for this - at the time (Brian) it was
70% of cases that went un-responded to.
And then if you wanted to follow up, as J. Scott said, if you want to follow up
with the UDRP to get the name, that'd be a little longer process. But we
wanted to get the takedown process quickly and easily for trademark holders,
and that was the thinking back down. And, you know, we can talk about how
we did. I just looked at our stats from (Donuts), we've had oh it looks like a
little over 200 URSs with a 90% success rate so far. So people - some people
are using it.
J. Scott Evans:

Okay with that I'm going to call a break and everyone has 15 minutes to
check your e-mail if you're not doing that right now, play on your Facebook.
Unfortunately we don't have coffee in the room. I'm not responsible for that so

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 40

I apologize to everyone, but I do think there's a café downstairs that sells
coffee, so. Let's all take a break. We'll meet back here. And when we come
back we're going to focus on the PDDRP. Thank you all. And for those on the
phone, take a break.
((Crosstalk))
Man:

How long are you targeting this working group, or do you have an estimate of
that?

J. Scott Evans:

Yes we're estimating phase one on the new TLD (unintelligible) finishing all
the work about a year from now. We have the final report recommendations
(unintelligible).

Man:

We haven't even - it's impossible for us to even estimate phase one of our
PDP.

J. Scott Evans:

No it's a multiyear process. But it's interesting work and it's important and the
thing is I told everybody (unintelligible) whatever changes we recommend
and ICANN adopts, don't expect that's going to be the rule (unintelligible).
Nobody's coming back anytime soon. So whatever tweaks we make,
decisions we make, that's it. (Unintelligible) I mean I'll probably be gone off
the planet before (unintelligible).

Man:

And also it's important work.

((Crosstalk))
J. Scott Evans:

Ladies and gentlemen, we're going to start in about five minutes, so if you'll
start wrapping up your conversations. I do notice that they brought snacks
and things over here in the corner if you'd like to help yourself before we get
started.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 41

((Crosstalk))
J. Scott Evans:

If everyone could start making their way back to their places we're going to
start in a couple minutes, please.

((Crosstalk))
J. Scott Evans:

I just want to check administratively, are we still recording or can we start the
recording? If someone will give me a thumbs up. There we go. All right. This
is J. Scott Evans. I am one of the co-chairs of the Review of All Rights
Protections Mechanism Working Group. This is our face-to-face meeting here
in Helsinki. It's June 30, 2016.
We've just finished about an hour and 20 minute discussion going through all
the rights protection mechanism and some of the issues that were brought
forward at our meeting on Monday. I have been - I told everyone we're going
to move to the PDDRP discussion, but I did get a request from WIPO that
they could respond to Phil's comment about the consistency of decisions and
the importance of that. So with that I'm going to turn it to Brian Beckham, and
then after that we're going to turn right to the discussion on the PDDRP.

Brian Beckham:

Thank you, J. Scott. Again, Brian Beckham for the record. I just wanted to
respond briefly to the comment from Phil. With the U in uniform, I'm not
entirely clear on the history with the URS but certainly with the UDRP, that's
meant to mean uniform across all top level domains. So before the UDRP
there were different dispute resolution systems being managed by registries
and registrars. The UDRP came in to provide a global disputes resolution
mechanism across all top level domains.
And so I think it's just important to be careful about when we talk about
uniformity of decisions, this of course is an area of the law, trademark law,
particularly where there are differences of opinion. Not every decision is
going to be decided exactly the same. There are different sets of facts and

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 42

circumstances involved. There are external experts that look at these cases.
So there will be differences of opinions in these cases.
And finally in terms of the suggestion about checks on providers where there
are differences in the decisions themselves, I know certainly for our part, we
have an annual training meeting where we get all of the UDRP panelists
together. We also provide a jurisprudential overview that assists the parties
and the panelists in their pleadings and in the decision-making process.
And so I think the question is not so much about what is the provider's role,
because the providers are neutral adjudicatory bodies, they administer the
disputes. The cases are actually outsourced to external experts to render the
decisions. So to the extent there might be questions about similarities in
decisions and outcomes, maybe one of the areas to look at in the URS is is
there a need for training of panelists like we do for the UDRP.
J. Scott Evans:

Great. Just for the record I want to correct a little factual information that you
just said. Prior to the UDRP there was only one registrar and one registry, so
there was - it was uniform but we were getting ready to introduce competition
into the registrar level, which is why we wanted something that would apply
across everyone.
And before then, there was no dispute mechanism. You had to go to federal
court in the United States, no matter where you were from. That was your
only remedy. And that's the reason we went with this because it was very
expensive both for the registry and the registrar who got pulled into the
dispute and for the trademark owner as well. So just a little factual information
there.
But I think your point about training is an excellent one and one that we
should consider, and that is certainly a recommendation that I think that we
could make and I think it's also an obligation that we could put on ICANN. It

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 43

certainly has enough funds that educating panelists would be something that
would be good for the community, I believe.
All right with that we're going to - Petter Rindforth, I'll let you have one
comment and then we're going to move to the PDDRP.
Petter Rindforth: Just one quick comment. First of all, there is for all these new dispute
resolutions (unintelligible) educational sites for panelists but then also for the
dispute resolution providers that I know about, they have annual meetings
with the panelists, going through the cases and updates. And although it may
not be as long as the annual WIPO meetings but it is some hours. And if
there's a possibility to have a more common yearly further education, that's
good. But the panelists are not without any (unintelligible) or competitive
education on these cases.
J. Scott Evans:

Great. All right with that let's turn to the PDDRP. As - I don't know who was
on our last couple of calls or not so I'm just going to sort of let you know
where we are, and also for I guess the observers in the room to let you know
where we are. We're looking at the PDDRP. What we have done is we had
asked the providers who are in an agreement to be providers of the PDDRP
to answer some questions for us.
And so we got written responses from the WIPO, we had a live presentation
from the forum, and then I think we had a written response from the Asian
dispute resolution group well. And those should have been circulated to
everyone. You should have seen those.
What we've learned, just for the room, is that no one has used the PDDRP
since its inception. We also have learned that there have been questions that
the providers have gotten from people who have wanted to know what it is
and we I think what I remember surmising was some people were concerned
that there was no remedy available, there were only recommendations that

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 44

you could get from the panel, not necessarily a remedy. And so that was
discouraging to them.
It was expensive and I think there were some burden of proof issues that
were pointed out because it's a clear and convincing standard as well. So
those are the issues that we've taken in and the information we've gotten
from the providers. So is there anyone who has any thoughts on the PDDRP
that are on the comments we've received from providers that they would like
to bring forward now? Okay. Yes, Jeff?
Jeff Neuman:

Thanks. This is Jeff Neuman. And again, just to go back to some of the
original work that was done on the PDDRP by the IRT. That's a lot of
acronyms there. The reason why there were no remedies provided or why -let me go back a step -- the reason why ICANN imposes the remedies is so
that the registry has some avenue to appeal those decisions. There is a
dispute resolution mechanism in contracts between ICANN and the registries.
So if it's ICANN imposing the remedy, then the registry then has the
jurisdiction to appeal that decision, if you will, in its contract with binding
arbitration.
Absent that, there was no way that a registry could appeal a PDDRP decision
by a panelist to a court. There's no cause of action. It's not like infringement
or anything like that where a court would have jurisdiction. So there were a lot
of discussions, and I'd be happy to go into in more detail as to why it was that
IRT had not mandated at the time that the panelists or the providers were the
ones imposing the remedy.

J. Scott Evans:

Thank you, Jeff. I have sort of stayed silent on this from my personal
perspective so I'm going to sort of open it up right now from me speaking as a
trademark and member of the IRT. I personally think that it hasn't been used
but that's not evidence that it's not useful, right? I think also it is way too early
to make a decision about whether it's non-use when some of the registries
have only been online for about 18 months, whether it needs to be changed

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 45

or -- because I'd change a lot of things about it if I had the time. If it needs to
be changed or anything.
I think my personal perspective is that it should be left in place as it is and
maybe looked at again at another review time, because I just think it's too
early and because we have had no cases under it, we can't really point out
any flaws other than what we would say are theoretical flaws based on our
own theoretical beliefs on what the policy should be doing. That's my
perspective personally. I see we have someone at the microphone. I'd like to
acknowledge them and then I'll go to Ellen Shankman.
Man:

(Unintelligible) from (unintelligible). You know, I made a comment yesterday
about the fact that there must be an avenue to remove a TOD operator from
power. You know, if it's abusing too much. And I certainly know of cases
where that actually should be initiated. Maybe the registry operator could
reform or not but there should be an avenue that makes sure that this could
be the consequence, you know, if the registry operator did not reform. Under
the (unintelligible) right now this is clear to the parties. It's so confused that
nobody knows what to do if there is a clear pattern of misuse or you know,
condoning misuse by the registry operator for this actually to take place.
If there is no remedy by the panel, does that mean that the ICANN Board can
make a decision or who can make a decision in this case if there is no
remedy? I haven't understood that. I'm not sure if it is clear at all.

J. Scott Evans:

Thank you. I think there's a recommendation that goes from the panel to
ICANN. Now, who would then ICANN - I don't think the policy specifies who
that is. I would assume -- and here again, this may be an instance as we've
pointed out with the URS UDRP situation -- that there's so much ambiguity
my assumptions are incorrect, that it would go to contract compliance and
they would be the ones that would make a recommendation within ICANN.
But there's no stipulation in the policy for how it's handled I do not think. Jeff.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 46

Jeff Neuman:

Yes, I would agree with that - this is (Jeff Newman). I think again if we go
back to the mindset in 2009, I think (Christine) had said it on the last call that
really what everyone was upset about was at the time contract compliance
wasn't doing anything. And everybody was trying to get contract compliance
to do its job. And so the whole notion of having the PDDRP I remember these
discussions clearly. We kept saying it wouldn't even be necessary to have a
PDDRP if compliance did its job.
Now we're in a very different environment. Compliance is doing a lot more of
them than they did back then, you know, and so it's hard to imagine what it
was like back then. But that's what it was. That's why it came into existence
as (Christine) said on the last call.

J. Scott Evans:

Ellen?

Ellen Shankman: Ellen Shankman. Then going back to why we did it was also we thought we
wanted to have some (unintelligible) protection mechanisms going into the
system and we wanted to have something that was going to be a catchall at
the end, so that we had hoped the rights protection could filter out the abuse
from the front end, but if it didn't then we wanted to have at least a catchall
that would allow it to do it at the back end.
And I agree with you that both why we had recommendations and that it may
be too soon to do it. The hesitations that I've been hearing conversations
about is that it's been described as a "nuclear option" and that nobody wants
to do it because it's taking down (unintelligible) and people are afraid of doing
nuclear options. I don't know if that's a correct label, but even if it is then I
think the questions might be do you want to think about mechanisms for
identifying steps that are shorter than the nuclear option that may lower
people's resistance to trying to address the problem.
J. Scott Evans:

Thank you. Mr. Corwin?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 47

Philip Corwin:

Phil Corwin. And I want to thanks, Ellen, for that great segue into what I was
going to say and am about to say, which is if it's (unintelligible) as a nuclear
option one, the best use of nuclear weapons is to deter their use, of their ever
needing to be used and if this is having a deterrent effect against really bad
practices by registries and this is the only RPM that's directed against
registries, rather than registrants.
That's good when you survey the feedback from the providers on one hand
who say the burden of proof is so high -- and we want a high burden of proof
here if it's a nuclear option -- and the fact that the end result is just
recommendations because then you get into a contract where you're really
talking about shutting down a registry where they put a lot of money in
establishing that registry and people have established domains there and
you're really wiping the whole thing out. End result you want a high burden.
On the other hand, I think maybe what's mitigated the need for better use has
been better vetting of the applicants to make sure there were no obvious
infringing registries up front and better compliance effort. So all of that is
good, but I think back when I first got involved with ICANN, there was a
collapse of a registrar called Register Fly.

Man:

Register Fly.

Philip Corwin:

Which was engaged in really criminal practices, where the executives were
stealing - they were putting a lot of domains in privacy protection then
registering them in their own name and taking the money and it was really
terrible and we found out that at that time, ICANN had a nuclear option for
registrars, which meant that it was rarely used because the only remedy was
shutting them down completely and the REA was changed to provide you
know, a number of different steps of enforcement with that being the last
option.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 48

So one thing we might look at here is whether there's some intermediate
options to discipline a registry that's kind of questionable without going
completely nuclear. Kind of a tactical option rather than a nuclear option. I'm
not saying we should do it, but we should look at whether that might be
advisable. And I do agree that it's way too early. If it's have a deterrence
effect and that's mitigated against needing to actually us it, that's good and I
think it's far too early in the new TLD program to think about eliminating this
completely. That's a personal opinion.
J. Scott Evans:

Okay, I see several hands. I have a question first. Maybe I am incorrect, but I
didn't think the only remedy or recommendation that could come from the
PDDRP was the nuclear option. I think that is like the last thing that can
happen and there are all these steps filled in. So the fact that people keep
talking about the only recommendation you can receive is pull your - cancel
your registry agreement, I don't think that's correct and I want to get that on
the record that I don't think that's correct. And I'm going to come to you,
(Jeff), and you can let us know. But I think first I had (Paul) and then I had
(Christine) and then I have (Jeff), okay? (Paul.)

Paul McGrady:

Paul McGrady. I'd like to build on what both (Ellen) and (Phil) have mentioned
and again, without addressing the issue about is nuclear the only, all that. I
agree with you that without any data to know whether or not this thing is
working the right way, the only data we have is that there haven't been any
so again, that may be deterrence - that may be cost prohibitive. We don't
know why there are no complaints under it yet and there's no way to sort of
guess that.
But I do think what might be helpful and what might help to ford deterrence of
complaints under this - frankly that's never used and maybe it's the best
policy ever right? Is what (Ellen) and (Phil) are talking about, which is some
sort of intermediate step. (Phil) said discipline. I would even change the
rhetoric a little bit and just talk about bringing a registry in the conversation by
somebody who has a concern about something that's going on in that space.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 49

And so some sort of active mediation method that we could tack onto this,
rather than changing this. If we could tack on a mediation step where we
bring registries and parties who feel aggrieved and maybe ICANN into the
mix to talk about the problem prior to action. I think that would be a great
thing. And the reason why I think that would be a great thing is because if an
aggrieved party really has a problem that is irreparable and superbad they go
to court, right? So is there any mechanism to handle the immediate problem
that is irreparable injury if something terrible is going down.
So I think a mediation step is consistent with the ICANN model of talking out
your problems instead of the nuclear option, or even leading with a complaint
against somebody. And so I'd like for us to consider that. And I also would
like to agree with something that (Jeff) said earlier on, which was when this
was built we were in a very different environment and ICANN Compliance is a
very, very different portion of the organization now than it was. It is much
more active and responsive and we've seen a big improvement in that space
in the last four or five years. I mean it's just unbelievable.
And so again, I think maybe the environment has changed so much here that
we should be thinking more about dialoging with each other, rather than
leading with something that is sort of automatically puts people into defensive
positions. Thanks.
J. Scott Evans:

(Christine), (Jeff), and then (Denise).

(Christine):

(Christine) (Unintelligible) with (unintelligible) services speaking in my
capacity as former director of the firm and not in any advocacy position, to tie
exactly into what (Paul) was saying. When the PDDRP was drafted, one of
the big things ICANN Compliance would always call people who contacted
them was the only option rather than nuclear option. And this isn't worth
cancelling the registrar's agreement or registry's agreement. And so that was
one of the big complaints. So when this was drafted they actually did draft

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 50

graduated sanctions into the PDDRP and I pasted the provision into the
(unintelligible) that shows the graduated sanctions all the way from a simple
conversation through just a temporary prohibition on registering domain
names to a long-term suspension to eventual and the exact words are "in
extraordinary circumstances cancellation of a registry's contract."
So to be really clear, one of the, you know, we (unintelligible) that ICANN
Compliance is significant when they address this problem but the intended
purpose was to obviously create a list of graduated sanctions.
J. Scott Evans:

Thank you, (Christine). (Jeff)?

Jeff Neuman:

Yes thanks. So this is (Jeff Newman). Just to first go to (Paul)'s suggestion.
Actually, the first step is sort of a medication that's built in there. I wanted to. I
remember when I was on the IRT to build in a mediation but I think it was kind
of shot down. And (Kurt) was on the side of ICANN so I don't know if he
remembers those discussions, too. I wanted to bring ICANN more directly
involved but that was not - ICANN didn't want to do that at the time and
maybe they will.
But the first step is that the parties have tried to work it out already and then
they couldn't, so you have to have the complainant make a statement that
says you've already notified the respondent and you've tried to work it out. It's
been 30 days and you haven't been able to work it out. So that's already built
in and we could actually emphasize that as a group.
The second thing is I really want to make it clear, this is only for one very
specific type of "bad behavior" and that is a registry essentially profiting off of
trademark infringement that's going on within the registry. It's not meant to
address any other bad behavior. It's not meant to address, for example, you
know, trademark owners are not happy with the prices that our registry
charges for Sunrise. It's not meant to address that. If we want to address that,
that's fine -- we can do that some other way. But the PDDRP is not for

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 51

registries as bad actors. It's registries that are bad actors that are also
profiting off the infringement that's going on - trademark infringement that's
going on. Not copyright infringement, not anything else.
So it's very, very, very narrow.
J. Scott Evans:

I just want to make a couple of points. One, I think you're correct. But two, I
disagree. I think this group can make it whatever it wants to make it. Okay.
I'm going to go to (Paul) because he wants to respond to (Jeff). Wait, wait,
wait. (Paul) to (Jeff), then I'll let (Phil), then (Denise).

Man:

So (Jeff) what's baked in now is negotiation. And in 30 days - I'm talking
about mediation where there's a neutral, right? And then ICANN participates
to the extent it's comfortable and the two parties, then we have a retired
judge running back and forth trying to make the problem go away. So
something a little more formal. Thanks.

J. Scott Evans:

(Phil).

Man:

Yes, a question for (Jeff). (Jeff), is it for any kind of trademark infringement
and my understanding is that it has to be kind of intentional. You have to
show that the registry intends to profit from infringement. It can't just be
willful. One is that there's infringement going on and they're turning a blind
eye to it but aren't encouraging it.

Man 4:

Correct. That's why I said when I said the registry profiting off of it, that was
my shorthand way of saying yes, that it's intentional and it's not willful
blindness.

Man:

But is it any kind of trade? Would it cover a kind of spam situation I talked
about before or just infringing domain names?

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 52

Man 4:

It's infringing domain names.

Man:

Okay so it's a pretty narrow type of trademark infringement.

Man 4:

Right now it's very narrow.

Man:

Okay. And my one other thought was that I don't know - we can ask GDD.
One reason it may not be used is if it's expensive and time consuming, and
the most likely immediate result is just to start a conversation, is there
another way for a concerned party to think there is a registry that's you know,
encouraging some bad practices to get GDD to start a conversation, or is this
the only way to do so? So more data we need to gather to understand what's
going on and whether we should fix it.
And the last thing I want to say is that we're having this conversation now but
at some point for this RPM and all the others, we're going to be asking
participants in the working group and other parties to come to us with your
specific suggestions for how you'd like to change each of these RPMs and
we'll consider all of them. But there will be a time for each of them when there
will be an opportunity to suggest this or that tweak or this change, narrow it,
add this possibility and so start thinking about what you want to suggest to
the whole group for as we approach that stage for this one.

J. Scott Evans:

(Denise), and then I'm going to the microphone.

Denise Michel:

Thanks. (Denise Michelle) with Facebook. Originally I was in the queue to
clarify that there is a graduated sanctions involved in the PDDRP. Other
options of course are (pick) DRP. But since I have the mic I just wanted to
reinforce that I think it's important for this group to reach out especially to
trademark holders and understand why these mechanisms are not being
used.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 53

We certainly know that there are registries that are profiting off of deliberate
trademark infringement. I think the important question is the market is
speaking and the market is not using these mechanisms. So I think it's really
important to understand why.
Man:

Back to the mic. (Unintelligible) again from core (unintelligible). I think what's
difficult to understand for people who look at this from the outside -- I mean
from users -- is why limited to trademark if there is many other kinds of abuse
that you know, quite, quite dangerous - quite problematic. And you know,
being engaged in.
And the other thing is of course in any registry there is not just bad users. So
termination of the contract is kind of an option that had a lot of collateral
damage. But people who were not concerned. Whereas redelegation would
be the responsible way to address it. You know, so redelegation would be an
appropriate avenue to make sure that registries are removed from a bad
registry operator and put into the hands of a good one.

J. Scott Evans:

As chair I'm going to address specifically that I think broadening this policy
beyond IP is way beyond our remit, okay? And I would say to the gentleman
who has brought it up several times, if you believe there needs to be an
avenue to address bad actor registries, then I think you need to be talking to
the subsequent procedures group or another group that if they want to
develop some sort of policy and it subsumed the PDDRP is one of the things
you could complain about, I don't think any of us would have a problem with it
being a broad policy where IP is just one of the tick boxes in a broader policy.
But I think it's way beyond the scope of this group to even suggest that this
PDDRP be some sort of general abuse policy because the name in our
charter is very specific. And it's rights protection mechanisms and that's what
we have to focus on. (Greg) had his hand up.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 54

Jay Chapman:

Thanks. Jay Chapman for the record. First, to point out that there are in fact
three post delegation defeat resolution procedures. The one that we're talking
about which it's full name is the Trademark Postdelegation Defeat Resolution
Procedure. And then there is also the RRDRP which is a Registration
Restriction Defeat Resolution Procedure where registry goes beyond what its
stated registration restrictions are outlined in its registry agreement. And the
(PFDRP) is also another form of post-delegation dispute resolution
procedure.
So there is a panoply and I agree only the trademark DRP falls under our
ambit in this group. I was part of the group that formed this PDDRP and while
all ICANN output comes from compromise, I felt that this was more
compromised than most and that we ended up with something which was
nuclear option not because of its outcome -- there are graduated outcomes -but a nuclear option because it's applied to such a narrow set of facts and
because it's fairly difficult to initiate and you really need to fit into it.
And also I think there's a disconnect in terms of potential complainants. This
is about pervasive and affirmative registry conduct essentially being a
ringleader almost of a trademark infringement gang and if you're only one
trademark owner, unless you have many, many domains or many, many
trademarks that are being infringed, there's really no incentive to be the one
to go out there and start this. You know, maybe there should be a class
action type of operation although without any monetary remedies, why it's a
class action - but at least some way to combine the complaints into one.
The alternative is to try to build coalitions or take advantage of existing
coalitions to bring these cases, but I think that the bottom line is that looking
for something that fits all of the descriptions of the standards of what meets
potential trademark PDDRP problem leaves you with a very narrow window
of types of behavior. Thanks.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 55

J. Scott Evans:

Okay. We've only got about 15 minutes left and so what I would suggest is
what I've heard from (Denise) is we need to have some way to go and ask
the market why this isn't an attractive option. We've asked the providers what
they have heard. I think we should think about that and if anybody has any
ideas. One of the things that comes to mind -- I just throw this out as an idea - is maybe have a panel discussion. We come up with a facts scenario and
we present it to an outside counsel, an inside counsel from a couple of
jurisdictions and have them talk through it, why they would or wouldn't do it,
just for this group to understand the thought process. So can understand why
they would or wouldn’t use it. I just throw that out there as a possible idea.
I see (Brett) and then (Jeff) and then I'm going to give you my next
assignment.

Man:

I'd just like to quickly offer another response. Perhaps one of the reasons that
this has not been used to date is because there have been no circumstances
that would have required it. So perhaps it has been a deterrent to registries
that we hoped it would be and that the behavior hasn't risen to the level
where anyone needs it.

J. Scott Evans:

(Jeff).

Jeff Neuman:

Yes, thanks. This is (Jeff Newman), too. And I want to take issue with
something that (Denise) had said. (Denise) said that there are examples out
there of where it could have been used. And I actually disagree with that
completely. There have been plenty of examples of bad behavior, don't get
me wrong. There are plenty of registries I would love to do something with.
But in this case you have to look - it's infringement. It is a registry with
trademark infringement.
So if you are upset at a registry that's charging exorbitant fees to trademark
owners for registrations, unfortunately that doesn't fall under this because
they're selling it to the trademark owner itself. They're not selling it to an

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 56

infringer necessarily. So I agree with (Brett) and I've been monitoring this
because this is a policy near and dear to my heart. I have actually been
monitoring and there are bad behavior registries that I would love to have
some remedy against but unfortunately I agree with (Brett) in this case, that
these specific circumstances I do not believe have occurred.
J. Scott Evans:

(Denise).

Denise Michel:

Thank you. (Denise Michelle) of Facebook. (Jeff), you misstated what I said. I
did not say that there are registries who are profiting off of infringing
trademarks and that can't be used for these mechanisms or these
mechanisms weren't used for that. I simply said that clearly there is behavior
of registries profiting off of infringing on trademarks. Period.
Clearly the market is not using these remedies and we should talk to
trademark owners and attorneys and people in this field who potentially could
use these remedies but are not. So the market is not using these remedies
and I'd like this group to have a clear understanding of why that is.

J. Scott Evans:

Okay. Here - please, go ahead. You with your microphone on. That's why you right there.

(Dennis Chi):

Ok, thank you. My name is (Dennis Chi) and I'm now working with New GGO
Registry but my former capacity is the secretary general of the ADNDLC. So I
echo what my former colleague who responded to the question why are
possible reason for the PDDRP not have been used.
But in addition I would like to compliment the awareness of this PDDRP in
Asian area is not high. So my gut feeling is it might be too early to say that it
is why there has not been used or is there any defect and we need to fix. And
another reason is not all the GDRD has been rolling out and operation not
new GDRD operators, just at the beginning. So my feeling is might be too

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 57

early but of course, if we can pick up some pitfalls that we need to include
then it would be a good thing.
But at this moment I don't think there is a mistake or something wrong within
the TM PDDRP mechanism. My only comment - my major comment is like
what have been manager and my former colleagues the remedies may not be
useful and I should say that it should not be - it is lack of certainty because
even though you get a remedy from an excellent panel and a peer panel, it is
not certain that it could be implemented by ICANN. So the lack of certainty
might be a factor for consideration why we need to initiate a TM PDDRP
procedure.
If I am a trademark owner, I would like to recover the second level of domain.
(Unintelligible) UDRP. If I was just likely suspended I go for URS. So that
would be much more straightforward and less burden for trademark owner to
tackle this infringement matter.
If there is a very large-scale infringement concerning the operation of new
GGRD registry, that might trigger the use of the TM PDDRP to try to try to
seek remedies to terminate the registry agreement and (unintelligible) off the
registry but that's possible and there is a lot of uncertainty and whether the
decision will be appealed or whether there is any subsequent procedures
being filed in a competent court. So it's a very lengthy procedure. So is
possible ICANN community or the working group may consider making a
recommendation perhaps in the future TM PDDRP may consider including
final and binding decision from the panel that would be more powerful or that
would be to enhance the certainty of the outcome. So that's my very brief
comment on this TM PDDRP.
J. Scott Evans:
((Crosstalk))

Thank you.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 58

Man:

(Brent) from RPIR. Just to echo (Brett), I think there's a pretty good chance
that this procedure has never been used because the standards have never
been met. It's not just a registry profiting from infringing trademarks. It's a
substantive pattern or practice of specific bad faith intent to profit from the
sales infringing needs. So that's a distinction with a difference.

J. Scott Evans:

Okay I'm going to let (Paul) be the last word on this and then I'm giving
everyone an assignment.

Man:

So two things. One, I don't know how we would ask trademark owners that
question. I don't know what the mechanism - what that would be like. But
secondly, the GDRP may be releasing this theme that would build up such
that a business model challenge isn't necessary or at least not viewed as
necessary. The national pastime of North America is baseball. In Europe it
appears to be football. For trademark people the national pastime is
Wackamole. And so it may be, you know, there are other mechanisms that
release steam enough.
And I don't know how we would get an answer to the question. It's a great
question. I just don't know how we would ask it.

J. Scott Evans:

All right. With that I'm going to ask two things. If there's anyone that believes
there's behaviors in the market now that are occurring that this would address
and it's not being used would you please send that to the staff so that we can
put it on a list to discuss on our next call, which is in two weeks by the way.
It's not next week because we all get I Was At ICANN off. Because half of
you are actually going on vacation. I'm not going to tell your employers that.
Next thing I'd like to see is from everyone that's here and everyone on the
committee so this will go in the record -- I'd like four points of things that you
think should be adjusted or changed within the PDDRP so that we can then
put that on a list and then we'll work our way through that list in our call. So
that's what your homework is. You've got two weeks to do this. It's give me

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 59

four things. And I don't want 30 right? So you can give me two - you can give
me four - you can give me five. But don't go over five things that you would
change if you were given the pen so that we can put that on our list and we
can work through those issues. Because that's the only way we're going to
address things is that we have it and we go.
I'm giving everyone an opportunity to put in their thoughts. So I would
appreciate it. If you don't have thoughts, that's fine. You can have an opinion
about the thoughts. You know, that's okay too. But those of you that believe
there should be changes, this is your opportunity to let us know what those
are so we can put them before the whole group. We have a robust discussion
about those and then we can move forward.
I see another hand over here and then I'm going to let (Phil) and then we're
going to close out.
Woman:

Thanks. Risking the ire of everyone at the table, can I add to the homework
assignment a little bit?

J. Scott Evans:

Yes ma'am.

Woman:

In addition to things that you might want to see changed, I think it's also
important that maybe you include one or two points that are big equities for
you. Something that you would not want to see changed. I think that's an
important counterpoint to that discussion.

J. Scott Evans:

I think that's great. I think we have (Phil) wanted to make a comment.

Man:

Yes, just as we close out this meeting I wanted to thank (Jay Scott) for doing
a great job of chairing this meeting. I wanted to thank everyone who's here in
the room for an 8:00 a.m. meeting on the last day of this ICANN First ever
meeting be - particularly those of you who stayed up to sunrise.

ICANN
Moderator: Nathalie Peregrine
06-30-16/8:00 am CT
Confirmation #8995677
Page 60

And the last thought I want to share with you -- which may be obvious to
many but just I think emphasizes the importance of this working group. Yes,
we have a long timeline. We're not going to - Phase I - we project delivering a
report recommendations on what if any changes should be made to existing
RPMs developed for new TLDs at the end of 2017 and then counsel will have
to consider whether they wish to adopt them. And then if they adopt them, the
board will have to consider whether they will take the last step.
And then the same thing for the UDRP and we haven't even tried to project
yet how long that phase will take. It could well take longer than the first
phase. But the thought I want to leave you with is that well that's a long time.
Once we're done and once whatever changes we're recommended are
adopted, there will probably not be another working group to review these
RPMs for the UDRP for another decade or two. So whatever changes are
made are going to be very long lasting.
So this is your shot if you think changes need to be made to get them. Don't
expect that if you miss this train there will be another one along for anytime
soon. Thank you very much.
J. Scott Evans:

And with that, we're adjourned.

END

