HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections
Thursday, June 30, 2016 – 09:30 to 10:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Good morning, everybody. So please take your seats, those that
are not yet there sitting, and we'll start.
So welcome to this last day of this new meeting format, publicpolicy forum -- policy forum, which I think in the feedback that
I'm getting is very positive, so we'll talk about this later today.
We have -- On our schedule, there is -- used to be a slot for
presentation of the website, but you have seen the mail by
Tracey that she sent out that not all the details are ready, so she
will just give you a brief update on where this is and what is
going to happen until now and Hyderabad.
The leadership team had a quick presentation of -- with ICANN
staff and those working on the website yesterday at lunch, and
this looks really good, so we're looking forward to what's going
to come.
So, Tracey, let me give you a few minutes to present the actual
state of where we are with the website.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

TRACEY HIND:

Okay.

Good morning.

EN
We're going to spend most of this

morning's session on the IGO acronyms, but we'll just give a
quick verbal update on the status of the GAC website.
We have a pretty robust team from the GAC who are leading this
work. Tracy Hackshaw is the lead for the work, the GAC lead for
the work. We also have GAC members involved from Singapore,
the Cook Islands, Cambodia, Japan, the United States and the
United Kingdom. I hope I haven't forgotten anybody. And other
people who have participated with bits and pieces along the
way.
We are building a website. It's not ready yet to demonstrate to
you. We were hoping to have a front end to demonstrate to you
here, but it's not really ready yet. We've been mostly working on
the back-end, and by the back-end I mean the behind-thescenes, building the logic, building how all the pages relate
together and work together, and that's not very pretty to show
you, so I've decided that we won't show you that because it's
not very exciting for you to look at. But be assured there is a lot
of work going on.
It is coming together. The logic is all working. The sorts of
features that you will be getting in the new website include
member pages that will include the photographs. Reminder -That's an opportune reminder the photographer will be here

Page 2 of 14

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

12:30 to 1:30 in the piazza today for anyone who hasn't had their
photograph taken yet. But that member page will ultimately
take you through to working groups that you are a participant
of, the longer term vision, once other ACs and SOs are on the
same platform, is it will take you through to working groups for
cross-community purposes that you're members of. There will
be news pages that will show things like announcements for
new public comment periods for PDPs and for other ICANN
processes that have public comment periods documents. So
those are some of the new features and so forth that are being
built.
The timeline is that we should have a working prototype -- We'll
definitely have a working prototype, because we're not that far
off now, to show you by Hyderabad. And thereafter, it is likely
that the new website, a version 1 website for the GAC, will roll
out early in the calendar new year.
It won't have all the interactive features to the other
communities yet simply because we will be the first community
on it. So it will be very hard for us to link to GNSO PDP on the
website when the GNSO won't be on the platform yet.
So we'll be slightly ahead of the rest of the community. But they
will come on board over time, probably over another 18 months
or so.

Page 3 of 14

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

The other feature it will have that is different to what's there
currently now is when the communique is developed, the
communique will be able to be automatically developed online,
live in the meetings, and then after it's published the pieces of
advice will go back via the back-end to a new tool called the
board -- ICANN board advisory registry tool, which the
leadership and the members of the BGRI saw yesterday. So that
will all happen invisibly behind the scenes. That's the other
feature that's being developed at the moment. I'm not sure
whether that will be ready for version one, simply because we're
not sure if the board tool end of it will be ready for version one,
but it -- it will all come together over the next 18 months to 2
years and there is a lot of work being done.
That's about all I wanted to say on it. Remember to have your
photograph taken 12:30 to 1:30 today if you want to be among
the first set of photographs up on the version one prototype. Are
there any questions before I hand over to the chair for the IGO
names and acronym session?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

There seem to be no questions, so thank you very much, Tracey.
We're really looking forward to having the website and also this
big inclusive registry of advice where the GAC advice should be
part of -- or will be part of.

Page 4 of 14

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

With this I would actually like -- and switch to the IGO acronyms
and protection issue. For your information we had another
meeting of the so-called small group that was convened and
held yesterday afternoon at 4:00 and this time there were also
people from the GNSO included which proved to be very fruitful
because in the end they need to also be involved in this. And
while it had been difficult in the months before to make progress
because, I'd say the written exchanges took quite a long time
because everybody was distracted, we actually managed to
come much closer in some of the still outstanding items and we
hope that we will be able to come up with a practical proposal
out of this group by Hyderabad, by the next meeting. And that's
basically the key element of progress so far.
Another thing is that what we've discussed earlier in other -- in
another meeting this week is that the GNSO has sent a letter to
the board -- we discussed this in the session with the GNSO -that they are waiting for the board to take a decision on Red
Cross and Red Crescent protection as well as on the IGOs and we
had an exchange with the -- with the GNSO on this. I see that
John from the OECD would like to say something on this one.
Thank you. Go ahead, please.

Page 5 of 14

EN

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

JONATHAN PASSARO:

Thank you, Thomas. I just wanted to take the opportunity to
give everyone a brief recap of kind of what's happened so far
and where we stand because there are a lot of new faces in the
GAC and also within ICANN. I know there are some people from
outside of the GAC within this room so I thought this would be a
good opportunity to remind everyone where we stand.
Because it was over four years ago that all of this started when
the OECD and about 40 other intergovernmental organizations
joined together in an attempt to secure protections for our
identifiers in the Domain Name System.

IGOs face serious

financial, security, and reputational risks in an expanding DNS,
ranging from individuals who pose as GNOs -- as IGOs to spread
dangerous

disinformation

about

global

pandemics,

to

individuals who pass off as IGOs in order to try to get fraudulent
donations. And just as an example, last week I received two
emails from individuals who were posing as the International
Monetary Fund who were actually trying to get my banking
information.
The types of risks that we face, as well as our unique
characteristics, put us in a particularly tough position. We do
not have access to the trademark clearinghouse, nor are we able
to use the UDRP because in doing so we would have to waive our
immunities. These immunities, for a number of reasons, are

Page 6 of 14

EN

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

essential to carrying out our functions without undue pressure
from any government in whose territory we operate.
The GAC found that IGO's unique status warranted us unique
protections and, therefore, advised the board that our names
and acronyms should be granted protections because IGOs are
unique rights holders, given public service missions, and the fact
that we are creations of government under international law
and funded by the public. Money spent on buying domain
names that fraudsters might potentially abuse and our names is
money diverted from fulfilling our missions whose scope is
established by our member governments.
Based on this advice, ICANN -- based on this GAC advice, ICANN
granted us temporary protections by putting our identifiers on a
reserve list so that websites could not be registered using our
names or our acronyms at the top and second levels.
Years later, in a 2014 decision, the board made protections for
our full names permanent. However, this is of little real impact
for most organizations.

For example, the Organization for

Economic Cooperation and Development, whose name adds up
to a nearly 50 character string, is almost exclusively referred to
as the OECD. In recognition of this fact, the IGOs had hoped that
the board would grant the same protections to our acronyms by
putting them on a reserved list as well. After all, we're talking

Page 7 of 14

EN

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

about less than 200 IGOs, a statistical blip in the DNS. A reserve
list also seemed to us the easiest and most cost effective
solution for everyone involved to implement. Nonetheless we
were willing to discuss alternatives.
A small group, composed of the GAC chair -- thanks, Thomas -and representatives of the United Nations, the Universal Postal
Union, the World Intellectual Property Organization, the World
Bank, the World Health Organization, the OECD, and the United
States was formed later that year to try to bridge the gap
between the GAC's advice and the GNSO's advice on this topic.
As Thomas said, this small group met several times and
exchanged several proposals in writing.

We also met at a

meeting that I personally organized at the OECD's headquarters
in Paris last summer. Unfortunately we made little progress on
the issue and were at a standstill nearly two years.
In parallel, as hopefully many of you are aware, the GNSO
started a PDP on curative rights protection measures for IGOs
which threatened, and still threatens, a conflict with all of the
work of the small group.

In short, that PDP attempts to

determine whether or not the UDRP is accessible to IGOs,
although the IGOs have already taken pains to explain why it is
not. Once again, it's an issue of our immunities. Nevertheless,
we remain guardedly optimistic that the PDP will not stand in

Page 8 of 14

EN

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

the way of the implementation of a compromise, if we are able
to find common ground between the GAC and GNSO positions.
I, like Thomas, was very happy when yesterday we met and had
one of the more productive meetings that I have attended on
this issue, and thanks in no small part to Thomas' help. This was
no doubt due also to the presence of several individuals from
the GNSO. We were extremely grateful to have an opportunity to
exchange with GNSO members face-to-face, openly and frankly.
And look forward to having the opportunity to do so again very
soon.
I will take the proposals tabled at the meeting back to the
coalition of IGOs so that we can further the discussion between
now and Hyderabad. We are guardedly optimistic that with
encouragement from the GAC and the board we may be able to
finally find a way out of this impasse with the GNSO. We've been
at a virtual dead like for years and this presents a great
opportunity for ICANN to show that the multistakeholder model
can work. The GAC has issued consistent advice and the IGO's
are hopeful we can help the board implement this advice while
also taking in the concerns of the GNSO.

This is why we

proposed the language for the GAC communique with the help
of New Zealand.

Thanks again to the New Zealand

representative which we hope will give a clear steer to a
reasonable way for conducting discussions in the future and

Page 9 of 14

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

hopefully quickly bringing a close to this issue. Thank you so
much.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Jonathan. Actually, given the fact that since this
story has started there has been a lot of new people, not just in
the GAC but also in the GNSO as we realized yesterday, it was
actually very helpful, I think, for many of us to get a very short
and precise recap of this -- of this story. So yeah, thank you. We
have some time for questions or comments. The OECD has also
proposed text for the communique. So I guess you've seen that
and you will receive a paper copy of the communique very soon.
So questions, comments on the IGO. And for your information,
as it is in the letter of the GNSO, and we discussed it very briefly
also with the -- with the GNSO, it is not exactly the same but let's
say the fundamental situation with the Red Cross is the same.
We are not yet at the stage where we have a permanent system
for protection. We are still under a temporary regime that
should sooner or later be turned into something permanent. So
that just -- but these are two similar but separate processes.
Questions, comments on this? Switzerland.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you, Chair. Well, first of all, I want to thank Jonathan for
the information he has given to us. I think it's a very good sign

Page 10 of 14

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

that cooperation is progressing. Also, after the conversation we
had with the GNSO during this week, so I see this as a very
positive sign. And I also think that there are steps being taken
with the other issue on the Red Cross protections. So I think we
should, later on, reflect this in our output of this meeting. Thank
you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Switzerland. Other questions or comments on this.
So I take the silence as a careful positive support or hope that
this will be continuing to go in the right direction. I see the U.K.
is nodding and some others as well. So in case that you don't
have any further questions, as I said, please have a look at the -like all the other pieces of text but at the text in the
communique. And so as we have a few minutes left, I would
actually use this for two things. One is to inform you that those
of you who were there at the last or second last meeting, we had
a discussion with the ALAC where we decided to actually also
increase our communication with the ALAC and the ALAC would
establish a liaison to the GAC in order to help us exchanging
information more regularly, also intersessionally to be informed
and inform each other mutually about what is going on in our
silos. And since then the ALAC has been working on this and
they have actually designated the first liaison, and he has been
here actually already this morning. For those who have been in

Page 11 of 14

EN

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

the GAC for a long time, they may still remember the time when
he was the Finnish GAC representative. It is Yrjo Lansipuro. So
please, Yrjo, stand up and wave, yes, perfect, so that everybody
knows that you are now taking on this role as GAC liaison to the
ALAC or the other way around, ALAC liaison to the GAC or both
around -- both ways around.

So he will be helping us

communicating more directly and regularly, which is something
that we've welcomed and we still welcome. So we're looking
very much forward. And as he has been on the GAC himself, this
is, of course, also useful because he knows how we work and
that is, of course, always helpful. So welcome, Yrjo. Looking
forward to have this tool in the form of you.
[ Laughter ]
And then there's another small thing, all small, I don't know
whether it's small but there's another thing. As you may have
seen, I think it has been circulated to you, that there has been
some discussion in the past months about the cost of the CCWG
accountability work that have been considerable, particular
legal advice is normally not for free because they don't have
salaries of government officials. And there is now an attempt to
look into this more closely to plan ahead with the budget and
cost for Work Stream 2.

And so they ask all chartering

organizations to validate the budget for Work Stream 2 for the
next year, and so we need to validate this too. I'm not sure to

Page 12 of 14

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

EN

what extent the GAC -- we all have the resources to look into this
resource question, so the proposal is that we will look at this. In
particular take -- try to take a close look in the leadership team
and then in the next -- in the coming days or weeks, we'll come
to you with a proposal. But we think we should do it with the
budget, but, of course, everybody's invited to look into this as
well because in the end we have to validate this as a chartering
organization and not just the leadership team. I just wanted to
flag this to you because it's -- it's an issue also of accountability
and transparency. And -- but we don't have the time to discuss
this here, and we can -- whoever has comments or questions,
just put them on the GAC mailing list and we'll take them up or
try to work with these questions in case you have any.
With this, I think we have a few minutes time to see whether -our colleagues from the SSAC are already in the room. Okay. So
please come up. For once we are not late. We're actually a few
minutes ahead, which is I don't know how we make -- we make
this happen. But we haven't met with the SSAC for quite a long
time as we have been concentrating on rather political and
symbolical issues than on security and stability issues. So we're
very happy to have you here.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

Page 13 of 14

Thank you.

HELSINKI – IGO/INGO Names and Acronyms Protections

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 14 of 14

EN

