HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session
Thursday, June 30, 2016 – 11:00 to 12:30 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. If we look on our agenda, we have time from now to
12:30 to work on this, and then after the lunch break we have a
half-an-hour session on exchanging views about how our
experience with this meeting has been, and in particular, also,
we need to start planning a little bit for the next meeting
because almost as much is unclear with regard to how to
organize the next meeting like it has been in the runup to this
meeting because it's also a new one-day-longer meeting than
usual, so we have to get to some shared understanding about
how we organize our time there.
And then we have another hour for the communique
finalization. So we have very little time, much less than in a
normal meeting. I just would like to ask to bear this in mind
when we are working on this.
So I would like to basically start a first reading, and if there are
some general remarks on the text as a whole, please make them
now and let's all try and be short in our interventions because,
as I said, time is limited.

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

I see Egypt, Iran, and United Kingdom, please.
Egypt, go ahead.

EGYPT:

Thank you, Thomas, and I'll try to be quick but -- and please take
my remarks for future communiques. I'm not proposing any
specific changes for the communique of today, but rather they
are a few remarks to be considered.
Because I feel, like you mentioned, that the communique is
becoming longer and longer, and also we need to fulfill some
other requirements in future communiques as per our
discussion during the BGRI working group, so -- which would be
even longer, so I suggest that we try to be concise and to the
point and try to make it as short as possible throughout the
communique.
I'm not attributing this to a specific heading or section, but it's
more general.
And on the rationale part, again, I think this is too long and
sometimes I feel the rationale is more of trying to convince other
GAC colleagues why we need this in the communique rather
than addressed to the board members, per se.
So just a few general remarks, again, for future, so thank you.

Page 2 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Iran?

IRAN:

Yes. Similar to Manal, the text is too long, but I'm not worried
about the informative part, I'm worried about the advice of the
board -- to the board. Too long. Sometimes, in particular,
rationale. And we have not followed. That should be clear,
precise and concise. We create problems. This is one general
comment.
Second general comment is Thomas, I'm very sorry that you
want to deal with the communique which is output of the four
days in about two hours. It's not correct. I'm very sorry. Please
accept my apology.

We should have more time, because

communique is reflecting the whole picture and image of the
GAC.
Thirdly, I have sent three times a text to Tom and to Gema with
respect to the use of the two-letter at the second level and they
have not included. Can you ask why? Do we have a particular
restriction not to take into account comments of -- by a GAC
member?
This is very serious. It is not my view. The view of many others. I
have talked with many other people. For us it's very important

Page 3 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

that we need to have agreement of the country, and I propose a
neutral sentence you have not even included for discussions.
Total neutral sentence. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran.
First of all, with regard to the time, the agenda as we have it here
and the amount of time -- actually, we have more time now
because we shortened the Web site more than planned -- was
agreed by the GAC. It was a proposal by the leadership team.
We had two phone calls on this some weeks ago. It was agreed
by the GAC, knowing that this is an experiment, but that was the
basis. That didn't come out of the blue. It was a proposal to the
GAC and it was agreed. Fortunately we have a few minutes more
than planned. We may need them. But we have to see how it
goes. And the more constructive and efficient we are, the easier
it will get.
With regard to text included or not, I will give the floor to Spain
shortly.
Just, I think, to make it clear, this is still text in progress, so
things may be added, things may be changed, things may be
deleted, and the electronic -- the mail communication is
something that everybody's reading and everybody's seeing, so I

Page 4 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

don't think that anything is basically censored or precluded. At
least that's how I understand the way we work. But maybe -- I
don't know if Gema, Spain, you can give some further
explanations. Thank you.

GEMA CAMPILLOS:

Thank you, Kavouss. The text that you provided had two main
modifications to the text that was drafted on Monday. One of
them is to refer to the need for explicit consent by governments
to the use of two-letter codes. That received two negative
comments, written comments, by the colleagues that were
working on the text. You know we work by consensus. So that
could have been a stopper to have a consensus on the text.
The other modification that you proposed was not included
because the session we had on two-letter codes, there was no
explicit opposition to releasing two-letter codes under brand
TLDs and restricted -- TLDs with restricted policy registration.
That's why I kept that text on that section of the communique.
If the text were supposed to reflect the Spanish view, the text
would be completely different. But I try to collect general views
and reflect that on the text. But we have the opportunity now to
discuss the text.

Page 5 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes, thank you, Chair. First of all, thank you, Tom and the team,
for making such excellent progress with the drafting to help us.
Thanks. Much appreciated.
I sent two items of text for inclusion -- they are basically
information items -- this morning. I'm sorry I wasn't able to do
that earlier. They are very short. They are two sentences each
on, first of all, community-based gTLD applications, the fact that
there is a study initiated which was reported at the meeting.
And second one relating to Red Cross, Red Crescent, Red Crystal
permanent protection.
So I sent those through earlier. Perhaps they will be included in
the next iteration of the text. They are very short, two sentences
each. Thanks very much. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Mark. Just so I get you right, the text that you asked
to be included is not for the advice part; it's for the information
part which is because it has been discussed. And the names of
the researchers won't be in the text. This is just for additional
information. Okay. Thank you very much.

Page 6 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So we can see whether this is -- people would like to see these
two elements included. One is on -- Mark's first mail is on the
Red Cross and Red Crystal designations/names, and the other
one is the study on community-based applications. Iran and
then Indonesia.

IRAN:

Thank you, Chairman. Perhaps the text that I sent to Gema was
not understood. It is a neutral text, and this should be included
for discussions. It should not be judged that it is not a
consensus. And it should not be judged because you receive two
negatives. You have not received other positive from that text.
So it should have been included for discussions.
And I request firmly and formally that we include that text for
discussion. If there is no consensus, no problem. But we have to
discuss that. So I wonder if the Chair of the group decides that it
is negative or positive or accepted, not accepted. So please
kindly include the comments for discussions. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran. We can put it in, copy it in, and then when we
do our first reading, discuss this.
I think what Spain was trying to do is trying to take the feedback
on the text in a way that -- modifying it in a way that it had the

Page 7 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

highest chance of being as close to a consensus text as possible
in order to save time. So -- but, of course, as I said, everybody
has a right to put text forward that this is very clear. So I think
this was all done with best intentions. And we continue to work
with best intentions.
Indonesia, yes. Ashwin.

INDONESIA:

Thank you, Tom. First, basically, I agree with our friend from
Iran, that we need to discuss communique with enough time
because, you know, everybody of us has an order from our boss
back home. And somehow we have to communicate with them.
And it has to be somehow reflected later in the communique
whether how it looks like. But we get an order -- I think all of us
are the same. We are all (indiscernible) here.
Now, secondly, I do not know how to put it in the communique
or maybe other methods. But in addition to communications to
other organizations, there are also some important points that, I
think, should be taken into account by all of us.
For example, in the last -- in the last presentation by Patrik -- Mr.
Patrik something.

Page 8 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Faltstrom.

INDONESIA:

I'm sorry.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Dotless Faltstrom.

INDONESIA:

I'm sorry for that. I hope Patrik will not listen -- will not hear my
comment. He mentioned one of these things. I want to make a
comment but no time, and I hijack him outside.
What important is that he mentioned the technical things, the
transformation of I.P. version 6.

Now we are still -- many

countries, many people are still using I.P. Version 4. We can still
communicate with each other because they, who transform to
I.P. version 6, they are still use -- they still have I.P. Version 4
number.
But later when those people doesn't use the I.P. Version 4
number anymore and use the I.P. version 6 totally, then Ashwin
that use I.P. Version 4 cannot communicate with Tom that only
use I.P. version 6 fully because the protocol is different.

Page 9 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So these kind of things is important because if that really
happen and we still have Version 4 and version 6, version 6
becomes big and bigger and bigger. Version 4 is still...
Then the logo that we have, "One World, One Internet," will have
to be changed. "One World, Two Internet, Version 4 and Version
6." Then you have two Internet -- two cyberspace, Version 4
cyberspace and Version 6 cyberspace. It's not what we want.
So these kind of things we have to take into account to consider
how we can keep the "One World, one Internet" version at least
for a few years to come and see how it has to be transformed.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Ashwin.
With regard to the discussion about how much time to use for
the communique, we had -- I'm trying to find it in my calendar,
but it's too full so I haven't found it yet.

I think it was

somewhere in early May or so where we had a proposed draft
agenda and we had two calls as usual in both regions. And there
were actually some that were arguing that we may not even
need a communique in this B meeting as the policy forum was
called then. And everybody agreed that, okay, we may have a
communique but a short one. And that was the basis on which

Page 10 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

we continued to plan in a very transparent way, according to
what you wanted us, the leadership team, to do.
Of course, life is developing and things develop and we have to
take that into account. But we somehow have to also be able to
rely on things that we've agreed and tried to basically -- yeah,
follow this.
So this is where we are at, and I think it actually still makes sense
to have a communique but try and to the extent possible keep it
short and concise.
And we have the time that we have based on what we agreed
during these calls. So I think this is what we have and what we
have to live. And I think we should be able to live with this.
So I'll stop here. If there are no more general comments, I would
like to have a quick first reading going through the text,
identifying. We will not go into drafting in the plenary. But we
will try and identify where are the elements that people wish to
have a rework of the text, identify missing elements, and see to
what extent they may be consensual but not go into the drafting.
We'll ask for written text proposals and so on so that we can go
through the whole text with a sense of, okay, where are the key
points where we need to spend most time on.

Page 11 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

One thing that I think we have to -- on a general level have to
think about is on the many agenda items -- actually, it's okay. I
haven't said what I have said. It's fine. Okay. Thank you.
So let's go through the bits of the text one by one. And, of
course, Tom has proven that he's very able to lead us through
the text. So I know that he's happy to do this also in this
meeting.
[ Laughter ]
In some cultures doing like this means actually yes. I think
Australia is also one of them.

TOM DALE:

It's a life-long fulfilling task, Thomas. It's good. We're happy.
What we normally do, for those who are not regular GAC
attendees, is as Thomas said to literally do a first reading which
means you'll get used to my voice -- I'm sorry about that -- by
the end of the afternoon. The section dealing with
interconstituency activities and community engagement starts
that: "The GAC meeting took place as part of ICANN56, which
was the first Policy Forum under the new ICANN meeting
structure. Community engagement took place at the bilateral
level, with GAC meeting with several ICANN constituencies; and
at the cross-community level with GAC participating in a range

Page 12 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

of cross-community sessions and leading one of them." That
"leading one of them" is to happen this afternoon.
"All GAC plenary sessions were conducted as open meetings."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I don't see any hands up, so I think we can continue right away.

TOM DALE:

Thank you.
"The GAC met with the GNSO Council and discussed:

The

current range of policy development processes, noting the value
of GAC members' participation in such processes, including
sharing information on a national government basis; the GACGNSO consultation group, including a recent survey of GAC and
GNSO members, and noting the aim of completing the group's
work by ICANN 57; and the need to finalize outstanding issue" -that should be "issues" -- "concerning protection of names and
acronyms for intergovernmental organizations and the Red
Cross Red Crescent movement."
Yes, at the back.

JAMAICA:

Hi, good morning. Jamaica, Wahkeen Murray. Just a question
on bullet 2. It might be abundantly clear to others, but would it

Page 13 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

be useful to kind of indicate what the recent survey was to
determine because as it is, it is just a recent survey of what -- for
what purpose. So for clarity, it might be useful to indicate what
the survey was about in, of course, as short way as possible.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Jamaica. That actually does make sense. So the
survey was about the experience with a quick-look mechanism
and the processes that the GNSO -- GAC-GNSO consultation
group came up with. But that makes much sense, what you say,
so we will include that.
Iran.

IRAN:

Yes. On second bullet, more or less the same. It's mentioned
that GAC consultation group. On what? And then at the end
says that the GNSO members are noting the aim of the
corresponding group works by ICANN57.

Sorry, the GAC

members on what? It says recent survey. What recent survey?
What was the survey recently done?
subjects.

Page 14 of 162

We have to have the

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you. I think your last point has just been covered by the
proposal of -- by Jamaica.
With regard to GAC consultation group on what, this is the name
of group. If we want to be short -- and this has come up in every
meeting, I don't think we should -- or I would suggest that we
don't spend time this. This is the name of the group. This is how
we've always referred to it. And if you can live with that, I would
suggest that we leave it as it is just as the useful information of
the substance of the survey and then move on.
Is that acceptable? Iran?

IRAN:

I see no problem to mention on what on what. We are not
writing for ourselves. This is for something that we have to show
to other colleagues who are not here. So it should be quite clear
of the issue. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I would like to ask you to come up with a concrete language text
for the next -- for the next version of the text so that we can just
integrate it. Olof?

Page 15 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

OLOF NORDLING:

It's quite simple to add "on early engagement of the GAC in
GNSO activities."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

If that's okay?
All right. Thank you for solving this for us, Olof. So we'll put that
in and also the addition by the -- proposed by Jamaica.
Can we move on to the next part? Okay. OECD?

OECD:

Sorry.

Just two grammar points.

There should be an

apostrophe after the "s" in "members" in the first bullet, and
then in the bullet, "issues" should be plural, I believe.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes. Thank you.
Okay. Tom, please continue.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. I actually pride myself on my use of apostrophes.
I'm mortified to have been called out by the OECD, so I thank
you.
[ Laughter ]

Page 16 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

It's a serious issue.
[ Laughter ]
"Meeting with the ccNSO.
"The GAC met with the ccNSO council and discussed three
things:

Implementation

of

the

adopted

framework

of

interpretation for redelegation of ccTLDs; proposed ccNSO
policy development process on retirement and review of ccTLDs;
and results of the survey conducted by GAC of relationships
between governments and ccTLD administrators."
Okay. I'll go on.
"Meeting with SSAC." That's the Security and Stability Advisory
Committee. Please remember those comments will need to be
updated to reflect what we actually said. The communique,
some parts of it, of course, have had to be drafted before we've
actually had these discussions. That sometimes is the way. But
of course the GAC can always change it.
Move -- the section on cross-community sessions is very brief. It
reads: "GAC members engaged actively with the range of crosscommunity sessions held as part of the new policy forum
meeting structure. The GAC acted as lead for the session on
workload scheduling and management," assuming that does
happen this afternoon, Mr. Chairman.

Page 17 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

It may happen, so yeah.

TOM DALE:

Okay.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Just actually, one thing that I forgot when we had the discussion
before about the time that we have.
In order, also, to compensate for the little time that we have, we
proposed and you've accepted that we would start sharing
elements of text ahead of the meeting, also knowing that we will
be very tight in agreeing on it, so that you've had time to look at
at least the elements that have been there in advance, and I
think -- and this is my take of this -- that this is actually very
useful and we will continue to ask for elements for a zero draft of
the communique before the meeting because that also saves us
time and helps people to -- even if it's a zero draft that might not
be consensual, but it helps people to consult internally and so
on and so forth.
That was just something that I wanted to add before, but I
forgot.
Thank you, Tom. I think you can move on.

Page 18 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

TOM DALE:

Okay. Thank you. Thank you.
The section dealing with the BGRI session that you recall the GAC
had on Monday, this is text from one of the co-chairs, Manal, of
Egypt.
"The GAC met with the BGRI, reconvened, to consider the
effectiveness of GAC advice. After discussing key findings and
recommendations of the ACIG report on this matter, the GAC
agreed to fine-tune the current description of what constitutes
GAC advice, agreed to create a template that includes all aspects
that need to be considered in any GAC advice, agreed as a pilot
to have a post-communique exchange with the board to ensure
common understanding of GAC advice provided in the
communique, and agreed to the BGRI working group suggested
work

plan

regarding

activities

to

be

accomplished

intersessionally between Helsinki and Hyderabad meetings and
beyond."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 19 of 162

Thank you. I see the United Kingdom and Iran, please.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

UNITED KINGDOM:

EN

Yes. Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Tom. It's not actually on this
text but we usually start off the internal matters with a record of
new members joining, and of course we had -- we have Guyana
and -- joining and the number going up to 168. I think we should
have that short paragraph of information at the start. Thank
you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Fair point. Thank you. We'll add that.
Iran?

IRAN:

Thank you, Thomas.
In the introductory part, do we need the second line, "After
discussing key findings and recommendations of the ACIG"? Do
we need this part? Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

No, I think we don't. We can actually -- if this is agreed, we can
just say "The GAC met, recommend," blah, blah, and then have
the bullet points, for instance, so that makes it at least one line
shorter.
So thank you, Kavouss, for helping us with getting to a shorter
text.

Page 20 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

Other comments on this section? That does not seem to be the
case, so Tom, capacity-building.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. Thank you. This section comes from the -- or the
text comes from the co-chairs of the GAC working group on
underserved regions.

It reads:

"The GAC held a capacity-

building session at ICANN 56 co-organized by the GAC working
group on underserved regions" -- I'm sorry, that's a typo; not
undeserving, certainly, but "underserved," it should read -- "and
ICANN's GE/GSE team. As an outcome of the session, the cochairs of the working group invited the GE/GSE team to pursue
closer cooperation and work together to assist GAC members
government officials" -- "to assist GAC member government
officials in building capacity and expertise on various DNSrelated topics. In parallel, the GAC working group will identify
priority areas and issues that GE/GSE could include in their
engagement related to capacity building."
Okay. If there are no comments, we'll move on. Thank you,
Thomas.
Okay. Working groups. These GAC working groups and reported
to the GAC as follows.

Page 21 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

"Human rights and international law. Following endorsements
by the human rights and international law working groups of a
work plan which had been finalized intersessionally, the working
group discussed the priorities within it. An active participation
in the forthcoming discussions of the CCW accountability on a
framework of interpretation for the human rights commitment
included in the bylaws adopted on May 27th was identified as a
priority work stream. Volunteers are being sought for following
this issue as well as the other items contained in the work plan.
The value of collating information about relevant conventions
and other legal frameworks was also discussed and it was
agreed to ask the IGO observers on the GAC to comment on this
and consider contributing to this exercise.

In addition, an

information exchange was held with the cross-community
working party on ICANN's corporate and social responsibility to
respect human rights."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes, Iran.

IRAN:

Thomas, could we make it shorter? It's too long, the text, in view
of the second middle paragraph that there is a group of work
stream 2 dealing with this issue. Can we make it shorter? Thank
you.

Page 22 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Yeah. I think, for instance, the thing about the work plan, yeah,
and other things can be formulated maybe a little more
concisely.
Maybe ask the -- those who submitted the text -I think the information is valuable but there are some words and
parts of sentences that are not absolutely necessary.
Thank you very much for this.
Can we move on?
Okay.

TOM DALE:

"Protection of geographic names in new gTLDs. The working
group met during the ICANN Helsinki meeting and it will
continue working on documents dealing with the concept of
public interest and best practices for future new gTLD rounds.
Additionally, it will continue working in finding more accurate
definitions and usage of geo names lists."
That's text provided by the chair of that working group, Olga
Cavalli from Argentina.

Page 23 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Iran?

IRAN:

Thank you, Chair. In the discussion, we said that there is no
need to talk about the definitions and usage of geo names lists.
What definitions we are looking for? We've mentioned that the
name of the country is the name of the country. We don't
redefine that. Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Kavouss. We have been working with -- in trying to
interact with ISO and see if we can work on new lists or
enhancing the present lists.
This is referring to that.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Egypt?

EGYPT:

Just a minor suggestion. Can we say "and continue working on
finding accurate"? Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 24 of 162

Yes, Iran.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

Thank you. Olga, what is the modality to work with ISO? Who
will work? GAC work with ISO? Because there is a procedure
how ISO work will be done. So what is the modality to that?
Thank you.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Kavouss, it's -- thank you for your question. In the meeting in -it's part of our working plan, and in the meeting we had in -- I
cannot find the place -- in Ireland, in -- sorry -[ Laughter ]
It's a headlock. We had an informal meeting arranged by our
colleague, Giacomo Mazzone from EBU, and we had this
informal exchange with ISO in trying to review this list. It's not a
formal GAC interaction with the ISO.

It's just an informal

meeting with them and trying to understand their working
methods and the way to enhance or create or change lists.
So this is only what this sentence refers to.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 25 of 162

Thank you. Can we move on to the next part? Okay. Tom.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

TOM DALE:

EN

"GAC participation in the NomCom. The working group met
during the ICANN Helsinki meeting. Different scenarios for GAC
participation in NomCom were reviewed. There was agreement
that the working group will develop draft GAC criteria for
selection of leadership positions in ICANN to be shared with the
whole GAC. The working group will continue its work and will
contact NomCom leadership to set up a face-to-face meeting
during the next ICANN meeting in Hyderabad."
That was text from the chair of the NomCom -- the GAC
participation NomCom working group chaired by Olga Cavalli.
Thank you.
Denmark and Iran. Denmark first.
Sorry. Are you chairing this or --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

No. The thing is if we constantly have to do this (indicating), it's
annoying, so I have no problem with Tom calling you to speak,
because otherwise, I get a tennis arm, as we call it in Germany.

TOM DALE:

Page 26 of 162

Okay. The first was Denmark and then Iran. Thank you.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

DENMARK:

EN

Thank you. It is stated here that we should develop criteria for
selection of a leadership position in ICANN. I think it should be
precise that it's board members.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Thank you, Denmark.
I don't think that we specified that this morning. In my opinion,
the working group could do also some valid criteria for general
leadership positions in the whole ICANN. I don't know if there
are other views about this. We didn't discuss this this morning.
Only for board members. So I think it should not say that.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. This is a text that indicates an intention of a working
group so I would urge you not to spend too much time on this.
Germany very briefly, thank you.

GERMANY:

Thank you. I actually share the understanding of Denmark that
we precisely said we would focus on board members and, for
example, not have an opinion on how the NomCom chooses
GNSO Councillors and so on and so forth.

Page 27 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

OLGA CAVALLI:

EN

Thank you for the comments, and apologies if I misunderstood
that. I will go through the transcripts and see if I am mistaken.
I think that we may keep it as general for the moment, as it is an
intention to develop this criteria. I don't know what you think
about this.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we don't have the time for this, I'm afraid, so maybe -- we
will have a second reading. Maybe if those who have stronger
feelings about this could quickly get together and agree on a
wording that you all think is reflecting the state where we are in,
I would be very thankful for that.

OLGA CAVALLI:

Just a final comment. It's not a big -- we can add, if the room is
okay with that, for the board. I think it's not a big -- it's not a big
issue. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think Manal has a proposed solution.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Yeah. Maybe we can just say "selection criteria" without saying
for who exactly. "Selection criteria shared with the NomCom."
It's understood, I mean, implicitly.

Page 28 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Then people will ask "selection criteria for what."
Let's have you get together and come back with a word because
we may have other things that we also need time for. Thank you
very much.
Tom, please, move on.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Thomas. "The text will be provided in the next
version covering our report from the public safety working
group, the review of GAC operating principles. Whereas, the
working group led the GAC plenary session on this issue. A work
plan will be developed and circulated for adoption by the GAC
before the Hyderabad meeting." Are there any comments on
that?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I had a question on the text. When will we get the text from the
public safety working group? That would be a question. Oh, you
got it. So let's hope it is more or less in the length of the others.
We'll see. So that will be circulated. Thank you.

Page 29 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

TOM DALE:

EN

Okay. Thank you. The section dealing with the independent
GAC secretariat reads: "The GAC reaffirmed its view that an
independent secretariat is essential for GAC to perform its
functions. Sources of funding will be explored with the aim of
continuing current arrangements after the current contract with
ACIG expires in July 2017." That text was actually drafted by me
in case you were wondering.

"Any conflict of interest is

oversighted by the GAC as a whole." Thank you. Canada. Thank
you.

CANADA:

Thank you very much. We would just propose a very minor
change to reflect some of the points that were raised during the
discussion yesterday. So it would read: "The GAC reaffirmed its
view that a sustainable, independent, accountable, and
transparent secretariat is essential and so on." Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Can we agree to this? I see people nodding. So thank you,
Canada.
And then we go to the Section C.

Page 30 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

TOM DALE:

EN

Thank you. Section dealing with transition of IANA stewardship
and enhancing ICANN accountability:

"The GAC agreed to

nominate a liaison to the Customer Standing Committee that
forms part of the post-transition IANA structure. GAC members
will work intersessionally to develop principles to guide its
participation in the new empowered community structure
established under the ICANN bylaws."
And, finally, "GAC members will continue to actively engage
within the cross-community working group on enhancing ICANN
accountability as Work Stream 2 issues are progressed."
Are there any comments on that. Iran? Thank you. And then
Brazil.

IRAN:

Yes.

Perhaps in the last part of that, you should mention

"appointed" or "selected" or "elected" members who ask to
participate in that. Or you have voted elsewhere. You should
mention here. Thank you. This is formal.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 31 of 162

Brazil, were you proposing the same?

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

BRAZIL:

EN

Thank you, Chair. No, actually it was another point on the
understanding that we should at this point in time try to
advance some language for further consideration in the drafting
session.
We would like to refer to the second paragraph of Section C. To
our knowledge, it needs some redrafting in order to make it
more consistent with the section on the same subject from the
Marrakech communique. I wonder if this is the right time to
propose the language.
So we would like to propose to add some language, and I'll read
the whole paragraph. It will read as follows: "GAC members will
work intersessionally to develop principles to determine the
conditions of its participation" and then it will continue as it is.
I hope Tom got it. Thank you. Then again, the spirit of this
proposal is just to make it more consistent with the language
from the Marrakech communique on the same subject. Thank
you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Brazil. I think it makes sense to stay as close as we
can to the text agreed in Marrakech. So I see people nodding.
All right.
E.U. Commission, were you also --

Page 32 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

No, no, I was pointing.
[ Laughter ]

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. So should we give the information that the GAC assigned
the members for Work Stream 2? Do you want to have just a
country or the name of the person and the country? What is
your preference? What did we do the last time? Countries.
Okay. And then we have some -- okay, all right. So we'll add a
sentence informing who will be the -- Yes, Iran.

IRAN:

I didn't quite understand the proposal of Brazil. I have no
problem that intersessionally work on the condition, but that
would be a draft.

It would be submitted to GAC meeting

physically for confirmation. I don't think intersessionally we can
agree on condition. It should come to us for final confirmation.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think there's no substantive change in what -- it's
just that the wording about the participation in the new
empowered community structure is -- the Brazilian proposal is a

Page 33 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

copy/paste of that wording in order to avoid discussions about
whether we mean something different than what we meant in
Marrakech.
But the fact that we will work intersessionally on these
principles and they will be presented to the GAC first
electronically and then discussed physically and so on. So, of
course, you're absolutely right. This is fundamental, and we will
have discussions, I guess, in Marrakech on this issue. So thank
you very much.
Can we move on to the next bit?

TOM DALE:

Thank you. The next section deals, firstly, with the CCT review
team. That's the competition, consumer trust, and consumer
choice review. It reads: "The GAC was briefed on the work of the
competition, consumer trust, and consumer choice review team
by the chair of the team, Jonathan Zuck.

GAC members

provided feedback on several issues being considered by the
review."
Are there any comments on that?
Iran, thank you.

Page 34 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

Yes, because we have not mentioned any name or any previous
group, perhaps we don't need to mention the name of the chair
of the group here as well. Thank you.

TOM DALE:

Yes, thank you. This is a section for information, not advice to
the board, dealing with IGO protections which has been
included at the request of the OECD.
It reads: "The GAC remains committed to securing protections
for IGO names and acronyms at the top and second levels, which
is in the public interest given that IGOs as publicly funded
entities created by governments under international law are
objectively unique rightsholders.
The GAC recalls its advice since the 2012 Toronto communique
in this regard, and remains of the view that, (i), concerning
preventive protection at the second level, that notice of a match
to an IGO name or acronym to prospective registrants as well as
the concerned IGO should be mandated in perpetuity for the
concerned name and acronym in two languages and at no cost
to IGOs; and, (ii), concerning curative protection at the second
level and noting the ongoing GNSO PDP on access to curative
rights protection measures, that any such mechanism should be
separate from the existing UDRP, offer parties an "appeal"
through arbitration, and be at no or nominal cost to IGOs.

Page 35 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

"The GAC notes the ongoing work of the informal 'small group'
and the efforts of those involved to develop mechanisms that
implement the above-mentioned advice.
"The GAC remains of the view that the preventive protections of
IGO acronyms, pending the implementation of mechanisms for
the permanent protection of IGO names and acronyms, at the
top and second levels should be maintained."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I just would like to add that this should be read in conjunction
with another text that is in (indiscernible) section. Do you want
to go through that text right now?
Okay. Let's stick to this one. Just get some initial reactions.
Sweden?

SWEDEN:

Thank you, Thomas. It's a sensitive issue to propose deletions in
someone else's text. But in the interest of having this -- the
communique as brief and distinct as possible, is it really
necessary to repeat earlier advice. We say here, we recall the
advice since the 2012 Toronto communique in this regard.
Could we have a full stop there and then we could delete at least
two paragraphs? Thank you.

Page 36 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

To understand you right, your proposal is to delete the
paragraphs with a small i and small ii, just leave it at the
reference and then continue. That will make it smaller. Is that
acceptable? Okay. Thank you.
OECD.

OECD:

We very carefully drafted this text as a whole. And so deleting
part of it, I think, would jeopardize the overall point we wanted
to make. We moved this text. We created new text in the advice
section and moved this to a different section of the communique
as a compromised solution with some other members of the
GAC.
Some of them wanted to actually see repetition in advice. Some
of them didn't want to see repetition in advice. In order to
create a solution that was an amenable to everyone, this is what
we came up with.
So I would appreciate if we can leave this as is just to emphasize
to the board that we do maintain a position, what that position
is. We offer a little bit more precision and then offer an actual
advice that's a more clear in the advice section.

Page 37 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you. We have 30 minutes left before the lunch break, and
then one more hour to go in the afternoon. So we have to be
moving on fast.
Iran, quickly.

IRAN:

Thank you, chairman. In the time that we have, if it is not
objective, let us retain the text as it is. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So any objection to -- France?

FRANCE:

Thank you, Mr. Chair. Ghislain de Salins from France. I would
support what the OECD said and Iran said as well. I would
strongly support keeping the text where it is as a compromised
solution. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.
Switzerland.

Page 38 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you for giving me the floor. I think that as the OECD put it,
it's -- this text is the result of a lot of consultations. And if there's
no harm in it, I would retain it. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Can we agree to leave it in and move on? Okay. Thank
you. So next part.

TOM DALE:

We reached the final section of the communique dealing with
GAC advice to the board.

The first set of proposed advice

concerns future gTLD policies and procedures. "The GAC advises
the board that, one, the starting point for development of policy
on further releases of new gTLDs" -- and here there are two
alternative text that have been submitted. The original version
said:

"The starting point should be a default position of

releasing new gTLDs on a continuing basis provided that... and
there are a number of conditions later.
An alternative version which has been suggested by the
European Commission reads the starting point: "Should first
take into consideration the results of all relevant reviews of the
new gTLD round and determine which aspects and elements
need adjustment and improvement (in particular with respect to
increasing diversity and ease of access for those from

Page 39 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

developing countries).
addressed.

In addition, the following should be

"A, minimum requirements with regard to

interoperability, security, stability, and resiliency can be met.
"B, an objective and independent analysis of costs and benefits
is conducted beforehand, drawing on experience with and
outcomes from the recent round;
"And, C, there's an agreed policy and administrative framework
that is supported by all stakeholders.
"Two, all measures available to the board should be used to
ensure that a comprehensive and measured approach to further
releases of new gTLDs is taken in a logical, sequential, and
coordinated way rather than through parallel and overlapping
efforts and/or arbitrary time frames that may not be agreed by
all relevant parties."
Three -- "by all relevant interests," I'm sorry.
"Three, the GAC principles regarding new gTLDs, 28 March 2007,
remain as standing GAC advice with regard to public policy
aspects of new gTLDs and should be taken into account at all
relevant stages of policy development.
"Four, the GAC will continue to participate in specific policy
development streams through relevant policy development
processes and reviews."

Page 40 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

And the rationale reads as follows: "One, there is currently no
public policy reason why further releases of new gTLDs should
not proceed as a general principle. There are, however, valid
public policy reasons for applying a range of requirements at the
application and post-delegation stages. The GAC believes such
requirements derive at least in part from ICANN's obligations
with regard to the global public interest, as contained in existing
and proposed articles of incorporation and bylaws.
"Two, data is not currently available to allow proper
assessment, both quantitative and qualitative, of the round that
is now concluding. Some important data, for example, with
regard to consumer safety and security may not yet be being
collected.
"A logical and efficient process means that such data needs to
be gathered before policy development processes move too far
ahead.
"Three, the 2007 GAC principles are a valid starting point for
consideration of public policy aspects of further policy
development.
And, "Four, GAC does not wish to advise the board direct on
detailed policy issues at this point, preferring to work through
existing mechanisms within the multistakeholder model."

Page 41 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We have 26 minutes left and we have a number of pages ahead
of us. So please concentrate on the key issues, on the
fundamental issues. We have to agree on which version of these
texts we will choose. And then really don't go too much into
wordsmithing but focus on where you think there's a
substantive thing that you would like to have changed.
I see Sweden and Spain.

SWEDEN:

I'm concerned about the ambition we have of giving advice that
is clear and concise, actionable, and identifiable, particularly if
we will not have time enough to do any wordsmithing, if we
don't have the space that we need. It takes longer time to
produce shorter text, more brief text. I'm sure we can add more
text, you know, just to say things, but this is an advice that takes
three pages, and I'm looking for the active words, trying to
underline them to see how will this be received and understood,
and that's very much shorter.
I'm quite convinced this can be designed in a very much briefer
manner than it is now, but we don't have the time.

Page 42 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you, Sweden.
Well, actually the advice is one page and the rationale is one and
a half -- is a half page so it's one and a half page in total.
Next is Spain.

SPAIN:

Very short.
I prefer Version 2, and I have a doubt on the mention to GAC
principles regarding new gTLDs March 27. Why don't we refer to
the advice that we've been giving along the process in the
current round. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Just for your memory, I think in almost every communique
between 2011 and 2013, we've been referring to these principles,
so that is nothing new.
Okay. Next is U.K. and then Iran and then Netherlands and
Switzerland.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Page 43 of 162

Yes. Thank you, Chair. And just two quick points.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

The Version 1, where it refers to "on a continuing basis," that
could be confused with the discussion about whether there
should be a round or a -- you know, a mechanism that is
persistent all the time, so a point of clarification about that. Are
we distinguishing that issue?
Which I think is an important element to include, but I'm not
sure this is the point.
My second point was, I do prefer Version 2, but you could
probably well shorten it and not particularize it, because there is
a huge raft of issues and we've made the point about diversity
many times and the lack of engagement of communities in
developing countries.

This is probably not the time to

particularize that. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think you're right, the issue about the continuing
basis may be interpreted in different ways and I think it's too
early for us to have a clear view on at least some aspect of what
it may be interpreted.
So I see a preference from Spain and U.K. for Version 2.
Next is Iran.

Page 44 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

Thank you. Yes, Version 2 may be better but do we have time to
shorten that? It is a very important issue. Do we need this
advice now or we could work on that and come with -- it is a
very, very important issue, not doing something in rush. Thank
you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. So maybe the question is: Are there things in this
advice that somebody disagrees with? Because if we don't
disagree, then the question is: Do we want -- do we need this or
not?
So please, when you reply, focus on do you think that this advice
is useful and necessary, and then as a second point, if you think
that it's useful and necessary, is this something that you would
disagree. Because if not -- if there's nothing that we really
disagree, what's the harm? So that would be my guidance.
So Netherlands and Switzerland.

NETHERLANDS:

Yes. Thank you, Chair. I have the same two remarks as U.K.
Let's say "continued basis," we should avoid that because it's
preemptory, and in particular, I prefer the European
Commission proposal and delete, let's say, the -- the brackets
text in particular because it preempts because we have other

Page 45 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

concerns and now we are putting some concerns higher than
other ones. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. We take note.
Switzerland?

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you, Chair.
Only as a comment to some of the other comments which have
been made concerning whether we are rushing or not, just
wanted to clarify, as one of the sponsors of the initial text, that
this was distributed almost one week ago to the whole of the
GAC, so I don't think that we are rushing on this but that
pursuant to the agreements that we have reached in preparing
the agenda, we distributed this well in advance. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. So should we keep it in the text and then go for
Version 2, try to shorten it a little until the next round, or do you
want to not say anything about this, bearing in mind that you
have had -- we've had large discussions. That was actually one
of the key elements of our interaction.
Yes, Iran.

Page 46 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

Chairman, again, urgency, okay. Switzerland push at my point
of rush, urgency. What is the urgency that we, in half an hour, try
to shorten a paragraph that may be getting worse, sending an
advice, and remaining on the board table for years because it is
not clear? So I'm talking of urgency of this. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Sorry. To -- I'm not fully understanding you. Would you prefer to
keep it or would you prefer to delete the whole text or
something else? Thank you.

IRAN:

I prefer not -- to take care of something carefully but not to send
at this meeting any advice to the board on this matter. Thank
you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Other reactions? United Kingdom?

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you, Chair. Well, I think we can shorten it. I would argue
that we should retain it.

It's an important feature of the

discussions here and we should be conveying messages of how
the GAC is responding to the board.
Page 47 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So I would retain the text of Version 2, take out the
particularization, the bracketed text that I mentioned before
and Netherlands has also supported, and finish it at Paragraph
2.
The rest is not advice, as far as I can tell, 3 and 4, so shorten it
that way. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think we have to move on, so take this as -- may I
invite those who have an interest in -- I see some people nodding
-- of keeping a shorter text to use the time over lunch break to
come up with a shorter version for the afternoon session?
Can we move on to the next part, to see where we are with the
next parts?
Thank you.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. The next section of advice deals with the privacy and
proxy services accreditation issues.
"The GAC advises the board that: The recommendations set
forth by the GNSO PDP working group on privacy and proxy
services accreditation issues raise important public policy issues

Page 48 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

highlighted by the GAC in its comments on the PPSAI's initial
report.
"The board should ensure that the dialogue on constructive and
effective ways to address GAC concerns is continued.
"If the board resolves to adopt the PPSAI recommendations, it
should direct the implementation review team to ensure that
the

GAC

concerns

are

effectively

addressed

in

the

implementation phase to the greatest extent possible.
"GAC input and feedback should be sought out as necessary in
developing a proposed implementation plan, including through
participation of the public safety working group on the
implementation review team.
"If, in the course of the implementation discussions, policy
issues emerge, they should be referred back to the GNSO for
future deliberations on potential enhancements to the PPSAI
recommendations

and/or

privacy

and

proxy

service

accreditation."
The rationale provided for the advice is as follows. Sorry.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we have no time to read that one and a half page of
rationale, so let's concentrate on the advice and then maybe ask

Page 49 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

the originators -- and this came only a few days ago -- to maybe
shorten that rationale to something like half a page or so, if that
is acceptable.
So please, your comments on the advice itself first. Thank you.
United States?

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Chairman.
My comment is on the final paragraph of the advice. It's the
third line.
I would propose deletion of "PPSAI recommendations and/or."
So the sentence would now read, "Future deliberations on
potential enhancements to the privacy and proxy service
accreditation."
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Any objections to the proposal? Yes, African Union
Commission.

Page 50 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

AFRICAN UNION COMMISSION:

EN

Thank you -- thank you, United States. On that last

paragraph on advice, I'd actually like to propose, if colleagues
agree, to delete it in its entirety for the following reasons.
Because we seem to be advising the board on a GNSO process,
on a process that actually is a GNSO process, and it -- yeah, in
retrospect now it sounds a little confusing, so perhaps we could
delete it completely, if that's okay with colleagues.
Because what we seem to be saying is that the board should tell
the GNSO to go back and work on its own process. That's what
we're implying here. So I think we can delete it. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Iran?

IRAN:

I don't see any problem. Why not we give an advice on any
GNSO activities? What is wrong with that? That is the whole
issue. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 51 of 162

Spain?

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

SPAIN:

EN

I don't see -- I don't understand very much the reason to delete
the paragraph. Regardless -- or whether we are advising the
board to tell something to GNSO or not, the importance of this
paragraph is to provide an incentive for the GNSO to engage
with the GAC in addressing GAC concerns during the
implementation phase.
If we do without this paragraph, we will only have the prior
paragraph, the previous paragraph, saying that, yes, both
groups work together and try to work constructively and that's
it.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Spain. I think this is a mainly procedural discussion,
so if somebody has a problem with the content of that
paragraph, we may have to discuss it, but whether or not this is
appropriate, I don't really see a problem with this. So the
proposal can be accepted formulation of the U.S. and leave the
rest as it is? Does somebody have a problem with this?
Sweden and then Iran.

SWEDEN:

Page 52 of 162

Thank you.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

I think the issue is definitely timely, so it should be part of the
communique. Perhaps it rather should go under "Other Issues."
If it's not -- if it's not a matter for the board, it's a -- if we're
communicating something to the GNSO, it shouldn't be under
advice to the board. I agree with that.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Well, actually, I think the advice is to the board to refer back to
the GNSO, so there is some logic in it, so can we agree to that
text as amended by the U.S.? Iran?

IRAN:

Yes, we could agree with that. One reason for that is that I was
at the meeting of the GNSO and one person in the GNSO -- I don't
name -- says that there is no GAC advice on the issue of the
PPSAI. So this is something necessary to do so that is what we
have to mention. Retain it as proposed to U.S. to slightly change
the last paragraph.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I see people nodding.

AFRICAN UNION COMMISSION:

Page 53 of 162

Not a problem. It's okay. Yeah.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Okay. Any other problem with this text or can we -- the advice
text?
So can we leave it as it is, with the amendment by the U.S., and
we'll get a shorter text after lunch break?
Okay. Thank you. For the rationale. Sorry.
Two-letter country codes at second level.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. Thank you. Two-letter country codes at the second
level reads: "The GAC has discussed plans proposed by registry
operators to mitigate the risk of confusion between country
codes and two-character letters at the second level codes under
the new gTLDs. The GAC cannot offer a consensus view on every
measure as there are divergent opinions in relation to them.
"However, the GAC advises that it has no objection in principle
to the release of two-character letter codes in brand TLDs and
TLDs with restricted registration policies.
"The GAC advises or" -- and this is square bracketed -- "or
considers it to be a very useful approach that the relevant
registry or the registrar" -- again, square brackets around
"should" -- "engage with the relevant GAC members when a risk
is identified in order to come to an agreement on how to

Page 54 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

manage it or to have a third-party assessment of the situation if
the name is already registered."
Okay.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The rationale, you can take it as well.

TOM DALE:

Okay. To quote the rationale, "The first consensus part of this
section of the communique is the one on brand TLDs and TLDs
with restricted registration measures. The GAC recognizes that
the risk of confusion in brand TLDs is nonexistent as the TLD can
be recognized as a closed space for the promotion of a brand.
So, no mitigation measure other than full compliance with
Specification 13 of the registry agreement is necessary.
Likewise, the GAC reckons that restricted registration policies
already exclude the use of two-character letter codes for
purposes unrelated to the meaning of the string, thus preventing
uses that are potentially confusing with the country code."
The additional square bracketed text reads, "The GAC also
advises the board to support an approach that allows registries
and registrars to engage with countries and territories who have
filed objections and have identified a clear risk of confusion or
damage to national values in order to address them in the best

Page 55 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

possible way. Other useful approach the GAC advises the board
to consider is to defer possible concerns to an independent
assessment or dispute resolution system when the content of
the Web site identified by the two-letter code causes confusion
or any other negative effect the country or territory in question
can document."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Now, I think this is something that we could continue to discuss
for quite a long time. I just want to recall to you we have given a
number of advice on this one. The stage of the process that we
are in is the number of these codes have been delegated already
and the focus should be on the mitigation plan and not on the
general views on what to do with country codes as a second
level. So that's in the hope to focus the discussion.
We'll take a few and then we see where we are. I have lady in the
back. Cayman?

NIGERIA:

Nigeria speaking. Our comment is on the second paragraph. We
are aware that there are some countries that have no objection
to the use of the second character at whatever level for
whatever reasons. But the position of Nigeria is as we write
ICANN that we do not want our country code at a second level,

Page 56 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

and the two character, three character, or the string Nigeria
released at whatever level. We would require explicit contact or
communication with whoever it is.
So just for the record, want to note this. This is not our position.
Since it says GAC advice, as we object to that, we do not agree
with that statement.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Nigeria. In fact, several countries have expressed
objection to this. So I don't really think that we can keep this
paragraph because it's not consensual.

That's at least my

recollection of this.
Iran.

IRAN:

Thank you, Chairman.

Yes, I agree with Nigeria.

Explicit

agreement of consent. I agree we delete that one. But we
propose a text, and I would like this text to be on the screen to
be discussed that is a neutral text. This is in line with what was
said by Nigeria and some other people. And that may find a
solution for that. Spain find it is not the solution, but we found
that it is good to discuss it. So put it on the --

Page 57 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Okay. Please tell us where or tell Tom where to put it and
dictate it in typing speed. You want to propose a text now?

IRAN:

Text is proposed already three times. They don't put it in one
way or another. I don't understand.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

He can't go and search in his computer because you need to see
this.

IRAN:

I have sent it to Gema. Please don't ask me to read the text --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Can I please just ask you to read it all because everything else
will take much more time to search for it.

IRAN:

Allow me to bring you the text. I send it before three times. I
don't find any usefulness of this issue. Why not it was already
there? Can you tell me why it's not put in?

Page 58 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Can we concentrate on reading -- hearing the text? We would
like to hear the text. Like to put it on the screen and then discuss
it. Thank you very much. Okay.

IRAN:

Unless otherwise specifically mentioned.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Please, Kavouss, indicate us where you would like to have it.
Where in this text?

IRAN:

After the first paragraph.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

After the first paragraph. Thank you. Okay.

IRAN:

"Unless otherwise specifically mentioned by a given country or
countries."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 59 of 162

And that would be added to the first paragraph?

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

No, after the first paragraph. It is continuing, another new
paragraph. Comma, "The release of the two-letter name or code
for use at the second level is subject to explicit agreement to be
obtained from the concerned government/country."
That means we leave it open for those people who have no
problem. They announce to the ICANN, country A, B, C, D, all of
them, we have no problem. Go ahead.
But the others should have the possibility to explain the
situation, and then I agree (indiscernible). This is almost neutral
text. We don't need to live with the view of those countries, but
we reserve our rights.
For many countries, almost 50 countries, it is very important
elements. Nigeria is one of them mentioned, and there are
others. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran, for this good proposal. Would that replace the
paragraph that follows? Or is this --

IRAN:

First paragraph and second paragraph, full stop.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The whole rest would go?

Page 60 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

IRAN:

Is out, yes.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So let's look at the first paragraph plus this newly proposed
paragraph. I think on substance, that actually reflects quite well
what we've said so far. That would be my initial reaction.
We can't spend too much time on this. If we don't see, like, a
convergence of views, we have to take it back to the lunch break
and come back with this.
Initial reactions? China.

CHINA:

Thank you, chairman. I just have a minor suggestion on the
wording. It was mentioned about giving "country or countries."
Maybe we can put "territory" as "country/territory," to add the
word "territory" in this sentence.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The second paragraph?

CHINA:

The paragraph proposed by Kavouss.

Page 61 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay, thank you. The Netherlands and then Iran.

NETHERLANDS:

I respect, let's say, the positions of countries who would not like
to have A second-level domain. I wonder if this is practical and
feasible in the sense that there have already been delegations
being done.

And my major concern is that we are really

introducing a new procedure with a new -- and let's say not -with an outcome which is not predictable because there have
already been delegations.
Basically, you are changing the rules along the way which is, I
think, for the applicants not the right way that governments
should, let's say, have the relationship with their customers. We
are changing the rules along the way, which is not advisable.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. The thing is as I have said. We are given our advice
on how to deal with country codes on second level. ICANN has
installed a procedure.

And we've also expressed our

dissatisfaction with the way that mechanisms has worked
several times.

There has been some adaptation to that

mechanism. This is all history. The only thing that we -- if you

Page 62 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

want -- need to concentrate on is -- the advice was actually very
clear on that -- is the mitigation process for the existing stage.
So it's not about whether we like or not to have governments
have a say. We said that. We said that several times repeatedly.
We have to move on because we have five -- one minute left. So
we will go slightly over.
We cannot continue with this. Please discuss it in the coffee
breaks. But bear in mind, we have given advice. The board has
acted. ICANN staff has developed things. This is all already
done.
The only thing that is -- is the question of in those cases where
governments objected to a use of a TLD for the reason of
confusability and so on, there are mitigation plans. Andthe only
thing that makes sense, if you want, is to talk about these
mitigation plans and whether we some advice in that regard but
not on whether or not -- neither whether or not -- we have -- it's
no use to say that some countries have no problems and others
have problems because we said that. So please keep that in
mind. I really think we have to move on.
Kavouss, if you have suggestion, please make it.

Page 63 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

Thomas, don't push us. Among 205 countries and territories,
nine has been discussed only. Why you want to continue with
another 196 saying that it was not correct? We have mentioned
in Marrakech. We have mentioned in previous that we have
objections.
This text is clear. If you have no problem advise to the GAC -- to
the ICANN, you have no problem. But those, they must have
their expressed agreement. Please do not push us because of
the one minute or two minutes. We don't care about the things.
That is incorrect.
So please kindly allow us that this is very, very important. This is
quite neutral. If all countries mention they have no problems,
they have no problem. But the others, their explicit agreement
requires -- nine has been already discussed but has not been
given any more.
Why we support the brands? Why are we supporting something,
getting into serious sensitive issues of the countries? If you
want, I can explain you privately what are the serious --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Iran, please. The only thing I say, we should not deal with things
that we have already dealt with. Decisions have been taken.
That's all I say. I think that makes a little bit of sense.

Page 64 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So let's try -- maybe we get there short. What about the first -the proposal of Iran is have the first two paragraphs, delete the
rest. Is that something that is acceptable? Yes or no. If there is a
yes, we're done. If there's a no, I will stop the discussion and you
continue informally and we come back later.
So any objections to the proposal by Iran?
Switzerland.

SWITZERLAND:

As to the now fourth paragraph, I would like to know what's the
rationale for deleting that because in the discussion, we saw
that was common ground. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So your proposal would be to keep the first paragraph, the
second one introduced by Iran, delete the now third paragraph,
and keep the fourth paragraph? Because that would actually be
a forward-looking element instead of the others that are
repeating history. So let me try and make a modified proposal
coming from Switzerland.
Any problems with paragraph 1, paragraph 2 introduced by Iran,
deleting the paragraph after that which is definitely not

Page 65 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

consensual, and keeping the fourth paragraph?

EN
European

Commission.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

I'm very sorry to come back to this. I just wanted to clarify that
from what I recall -- and the secretariat can confirm -- we gave
similar advice but turned the other way around last time. In
other words, you could use the two-letter country code at
second level unless there was a refusal.
Now, we've switched it around to the exact opposite, that you
can't use it unless you agree. So it seems to me we're changing
the advice.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

No, no.

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

It was a question. Just a minute, Iran, if you don't mind.
So my proposal is the following, that the secretariat looks up the
exact wording we used the last time on this issue.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 66 of 162

And we copy/paste it.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EUROPEAN COMMISSION:

EN

And clarifies that what we are saying now is not contradictory or
different from what we said the last time. And we -- okay?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Excuse myself. We have to move on. We have to move on.
Otherwise, you will not have time to not even eat a sandwich.
And I think that's what we should aim for.
So we take note that there's not yet agreement. Let's continue
to think during the lunch break. And I would urge you, don't -- if
we repeat past advice, then we copy/paste them in or we make a
reference to the past advice. But let's try to reformulate in new
words past advice.
I think that's something that we should be able to build on
because, otherwise, it's difficult. Thank you for understanding.
Let's go to the next bit, which is the use of the three-letter codes
in the ISO list.

IRAN:

You didn't allow me to (indiscernible) myself.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

No, I'm sorry.

Page 67 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

She did not understand our problem. The issue --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Please go and sort this out bilaterally. We don't have the time.
I'm very sorry. We spent enough --

IRAN:

So close the meeting.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

No, I don't close the meeting.

IRAN:

No, no, no. We have to listen to our argument. The view of the
country is country has not replied.
considered --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Please, Kavouss.

IRAN:

-- agreement.

Page 68 of 162

This non-reply was

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Please, Kavouss. Otherwise, you have to apply for the Chair.
Then you sit here. I urge you to move on.

IRAN:

No, I don't like that.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We will continue the discussion after lunch. But now we have to
move forward. Thank you very much.

IRAN:

I will come back after lunch, yes.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Please, Tom, go ahead.

TOM DALE:

The section on advice to the board deals with use of three-letter
codes in the ISO-3166 list as gTLDs in the future rounds. It reads,
"The GAC has discussed the reservation of ISO-3166-1 alpha
three codes at the top level and interacted with the community
in the cross-community session on geographic names held at
this ICANN meeting.
"As stated in the initial GAC input on three-character country
codes as top-level domains in future rounds conveyed by letter

Page 69 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

of GAC Chair on 14th December, 2015, to the co-chairs of the
cross-community working group on the use of country and
territory names as top-level domains, there might be different
policy approaches to using country codes as TLDs in the public
interest.

But, many issues need to be addressed before a

possible change to the current protection of the ISO-3166-1
three-character country codes can be considered.
"Therefore, the GAC encourages the community to engage with
the GAC in discussions around this issue and refrain from
bringing proposals forward to the board on this issue until all
concerns and views have been carefully analyzed and
addressed.
"The GAC advises the board not to lift current protections at
least until in-depth discussions have taken place in the GAC and
with the constituencies involved."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tom. We won't read the rationale. Let's try and
concentrate on the text.
Any comments, please, on that text?
Niue?

Page 70 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

NIUE:

Can we just take away the word "at least"?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Can you help us? Where exactly is that?

NIUE:

"The board will" -- the word "not lift current at least until indepth." So we go just for "lift" --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

In the last paragraph? Okay.

NIUE:

Yeah. You with me?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

All right. Any other comments? Is that acceptable that we take
out the "at least"?
Canada, U.K., and Netherlands. Please be short.
Canada, U.K., and Netherlands.

CANADA:

Thank you very much. Just a minor suggestion. I'm not sure
that we want to be seen as telling the community not to bring

Page 71 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

forward proposals, so we'd just suggest in that third paragraph
deleting "around," so that it reads, "Therefore, the GAC
encourages the community to engage with the GAC in
discussions on this issue until all concerns and views have been
carefully analyzed and addressed."
So deleting "around this issue" all the way to "until." Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So you propose to stop after "the GAC in discussions" or after
"around this issue"?

CANADA:

Sorry. So just to clarify, I'm proposing to delete "around this
issue and refrain from big proposals forward to the board."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

That middle part of the sentence.

CANADA:

Yes.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay.

Page 72 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CANADA:

Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Further -- we'll collect the proposals and then we'll see whether
this is consensual. Any other requests for modifications of the
text? I have the U.K. and then the Netherlands, please.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Thank you, Chair. Just presentationally, I think there's only
one element of advice here in the fourth paragraph: "But not
lifting the current protections set out in the applicant guidebook
for the current round."
All the rest is background, isn't it?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The rest is rationale, actually, yeah.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Perhaps that could be reduced into the rationale. Sorry. You
had --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think you have a fair point.
Netherlands?

Page 73 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

NETHERLANDS:

Yeah. There's one point that maybe English native speakers can
advise. It looks like if you take out "at least," as Niue said, then it
really is a consequential thing that it will lift current protection -the current restrictions will be lifted after discussions have taken
place.
What I mean is that we should put it in a way that's not
dependent on only discussions to lift away the protection.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

So Niue, the text implies that once in-depth

discussions have taken place, then the board should lift the
current protections, which is not what we want to say, probably.
Okay. I take note.
Before I give the floor to Iran, just would you agree that actually
the bit of advice is the last paragraph and the rest should be part
of the rationale? Is that something that you think makes sense?
I see people nodding so we could -- let -- let us work on the last
paragraph, because that's the key words we want to say, and
maybe, the Netherlands, if you could come up with a text for the
afternoon session, that would be good.

Page 74 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

Iran, please.

IRAN:

Thank you, Thomas. Could you tell me as the chair what are we
telling in the paragraph "Therefore, the GAC encourages the
community"?
Does the GAC advice to the board encourage the community?
What does it mean?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

It's not advice.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we -- yeah. You have a fair point, but I think that will go
out of the text or be merged into -- into a rationale anyway. I
have a request from Gabon.

No, not Gabon.

Help me.

Swaziland. Yes. Of course.

SWAZILAND:

Thank you, Chair. I'm wondering, Chair, if it would be a problem
if we just say "The GAC advises the board not to lift current
protections on three-letter codes" and then we finish there.
Because I don't -- I may be wrong, but I don't think -- I don't
remember anyone supporting the use of three-letter character

Page 75 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

codes here in GAC for TLDs, such that probably it could be our
final advice that that matter should not be even on the table.
I stand to be corrected, Chair.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Swaziland.

I think we have had a remote

participation from Estonia that -- where actually the government
would like to use that code.
But I think the elements that we are trying to say are (a)
discussions should be held on this and (b) at least for the time
being without prejudice to what will be after that discussions
that protections should not be lifted.
Are these the two things that we're trying to say as advice? Do I
get -- do I get you right?
I repeat. (a) is more discussions need to be held on this issue
before any decision is taken, and there should be -- for the time
being, there should be no lifting of the current protection until -without prejudice to what happens after that discussion.
Are these the elements that you think would make sense to have
in the advice?
Any objections to these two elements?

Page 76 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

If you agree, so then we'll try and formulate something that
reflects that -- that -- these two elements, and we would like to
urge Spain and whoever to come up with a rationale that would
include elements, if necessary, from the parts that we deleted
from the previous advice text.
Okay. So we have one last remaining item and then we will
break up for lunch and hope that we all take a breath and come
back together refreshed, and this is the protection of IGO names
and acronyms. Thank you.
Tom?

TOM DALE:

Thank you. "Protection of IGO names and acronyms. The GAC:
(a) advises the board to actively engage both the GAC and the
GNSO on the issue of IGO protections in an effort to reconcile
differences between GNSO and GAC advice on this topic while
remaining responsive to concerns laid out in GAC advice since
the Toronto communique; (b) taking into account the number of
individuals who have joined both the board and the GNSO since
the GAC first brought this issue to the attention of the ICANN
community, advises the board to engage the IGOs in its
discussions (both within the board and with the GNSO) where
appropriate, given that the IGOs are best placed to comment
upon the compatibility of any proposals with their unique status

Page 77 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

as noncommercial, publicly funded creations of government
under international law."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Comments. Iran?

IRAN:

It seems that the first part, asking the board to engage with GAC,
means that the board has already rejected our advice and we
want to -- them to come back to us.
And then what is the issue of the GAC advising the board to be
engaged with the GNSO? It is our duty? Why it is mentioned that
we have such a duty to ask the board to be engaged with the
GNSO? This isn't our duty. So the whole thing is to be rewritten.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran.
I think the board has not rejected advice but there is like a
temporary thing that is not finite and so it's subtle.
But there may be elements that we -- that are also not new or
repeating past advice in different words that may be confusing.
OECD, do you want to react to the questions raised by Iran?

Page 78 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

OECD:

EN

Yeah. I just wanted to echo you in stating that, yeah, the board
hasn't formally rejected GAC advice.

There's just this

outstanding conflict between GNSO and GAC advice.

This

particular piece of advice was drafted in order to reflect
conversations that we've had over the past week during which
we had engagement with the board and the GNSO on this issue.
We found that we had more productive discussions than we
have ever had on this issue over the past four years and we think
that it's very important that the GAC acknowledges this and
advises the board to continue in the same vein, and that's why I
think it's crucial that all of this -- all of these pieces of advice
remain in the communique. It's all a package. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Actually, I was confusing it with the previous text.
This is actually -- the idea of Part 1 is to engage -- because this
should be board led, this small group. That's a reference to the
small group, I guess. And to be honest, it was -- many times it
was me who made the initial steps that this group convenes and
moves on, and there is an expectation expressed in this that the
board would keep on driving this, which is an advice that we can
give to the board to engage with the community, both the GNSO
and the GAC.

Page 79 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

And the point in 2 is taking the fact that there have been some
changes of individuals in the discussion.

It's basically an

explanation of -- or giving some background. So what -- what do
you think? Is this appropriate here or, rather, not? U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thanks. Well, I would only suggest that as there is a process that
is, you know, underway, the advice could be to pursue this
process with urgency rather than to actively -It sounds like we're actually saying to the board, "You haven't
been doing it," but actually, I think it's fair to say there has been
positive interaction. "To pursue with urgency with the GAC the
issue of" -- "and the GNSO the issue of" -- text along those lines.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So that would be a slight amendment to the first paragraph. Is
that right?
OECD?

OECD:

Thank you, U.K.
First of all, I think there's -- there has been a pretty -- there's
been a shift in strategy on this issue that, again, seems to be

Page 80 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

beginning bear fruits and that's where we want to make sure
that we continue in that vein rather than the previous vein,
because in fact there was not really any measurable progress on
this issue for about two years and we found -- and Thomas was
at this meeting and you can comment on this, if you feel it's
appropriate -- that in particular the involvement of the GNSO
directly in this -- because the GNSO is not formally a member of
the small group -- was a particularly important ingredient in the
success of those meetings.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. We have to stop here. Just one word.
There has been some progress, as you mentioned, in the OECD
meeting last year, but let's not go into the details.
I think what we're trying to say -- and I think that is a fair point -it was upon my request that the GNSO was included in this
group, which was not the case before, and that we want to build
on that, having an inclusive debate.
I wonder whether, for instance, we could -- yeah -- shorten this
down to the essence, and basically the message is, we need to
keep being actively engaged in this small group with everybody
at the table and speed up and continue and not give in,
something like that.

Page 81 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Can we -- do you agree with this message? And then I will try
and reformulate it, together with some others, over lunch break.
Is that okay? Any objections?
Okay. Thank you.
This is not easy, I know, for everybody. We all have so many
things we want to say, but we somehow need to try and shape
this, so when I sometimes force you, it's because we need to get
there together. Thank you very much.
Now, one question. What we could do, we have a session on
feedback on this meeting and starting the preparation of the
next meeting. It's up to you. We could continue the -- the
communique and then see how much time we have for that
discussion, because the risk, if we start with this -- the discussion
on preparing the next meeting, I think the more urgent thing is
the communique.
Would you be okay -- I see people nodding -- we switch it
around? Anna, for your information, you are fine with this too?
Because Anna will lead us on this one.
We will start with the communique at 13:30, rather sharp, and
then see how far -- how much time we take, and then -- and then
spend the rest until 3:00 on the -- on preparing the next meeting.

Page 82 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Okay. That's agreed. Thank you very much. So please be here
as sharp to 1:30 as possible, okay? Thank you.

[ Lunch break ]

Page 83 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Just for your information, we are still getting pieces of text. We
are working on it as fast as we can but we can only do small
miracles. For the bigger ones, other people are in charge.
Please take your seats.
Okay. Thank you. We are restarting. Thank you very much for
those who have been working hard during lunchtime on helping
us with new text.
Two remarks.
First of all, do we still want to have a communique going out
today?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Any opposition?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. So -- because we need to be sure that we're all on the
same page where the basics are concerned.

Page 84 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

In that call where we discussed the agenda, I advised you to take
your return flights not on Thursday evening but on Friday
because in case we wouldn't make it, we would have the option
to continue tonight. I'm not sure whether you want this.
So is the aim that we finish the communique at 3:00?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. So that just -- that would mean that we all need to be very
focused on the essence, on the one hand, and there may be
some issues that may be important but not super urgent so we
could deal with them either at the next meeting or in a letter
formulating an advice that we would start drafting immediately
after this meeting.
The latter thing works -- will work if we have a consensus on the
basic message and it's just the initial carefully formulating it. If
it's more contentious, then we would need to defer it to
Hyderabad.
So please keep in mind which are the issues that you would like
to see in the communique now, and that would need to have
priority, and I would spend most of the time on these issues,

Page 85 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

whereas what we may have to defer to later, that would be like
second priority for now, or what you think can be discussed in
Hyderabad, that would also be second priority.
Is this way of proceeding basically what you think is reasonable
under the circumstances we're in?
Switzerland, any objections? No.
Yes, Kavouss.

IRAN:

No objection to 3:00, no objection to 1:00, but we have to do
something correctly. The point that we have raised is concerned
56 countries.

It's not only one.

All Islamic countries are

concerned. I'm not speaking on their behalf but they are not
here but they are concerned. So that is important.
Read the previous GAC advice.

Never we talk about the

agreement, how it should be taken. ICANN interpreted that if a
letter sent and no reply comes means agreement. This is not
correct. That's all. We never touched that. I -- Singapore,
Dublin, and Marrakech, never we say that. I have a three lines
letter, "Concerns of relevant government.
governments should be alerted as requested."

Page 86 of 162

The relevant

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So -- but the way is how ICANN interpret that. They interpret it
differently under particular pressure, so please kindly correct
that. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran. I think we're fully with you. We'll look at this
and it's integrated -- your proposal is integrated in the text that
you will see on screen. We'll get there.
So we have a basic understanding on which underlying
assumptions and shared vision that we are working here.
Okay. So let's go through it.
We'll not go through the elements where we had agreed, so let's
try and just go through where we have new text and try and
proceed in an optimized way according to the circumstances.
Thank you.
So Tom, second reading.

TOM DALE:

Thank you.
There were no significant changes to the introduction.
There were some minor changes to the meeting with the GNSO.

Page 87 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

There were some -- I included the amendments that members
had suggested in that session, so I'll pause there.
U.K.? Thank you.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Thank you. Tom.
Just minor editorial. On the third bullet on the GNSO, we should
pluralize, because IGOs and Red Cross are two separate issues,
as Thomas, the chair, pointed out.
So we should pluralize "protections" in the first line, and then I
would -- to emphasize the sort of separateness, if you like,
before "Red Cross/Red Crescent" we add the word "for." So
"for" -- "and for the Red Cross/Red Crescent present
movements."
Minor editorial, but there is a point to it. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

I think we can accept that.

That clarifies the

situation.
Can we move on?
The meeting with the SSAC is not yet updated, but I guess we
trust --

Page 88 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

TOM DALE:

That's fine.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

-- the secretariat that that factual reporting about what we
discussed is -- it's -- okay.
There's one issue missing.
All right.

TOM DALE:

There was a minor change to the text on the BGRI on -I'm trying to remember what it is. I'm sorry. It's been a little -- a
little frantic here. But whatever it is, it's on the screen, so...
I'm sorry. There was the deletion of a reference to the ACIG
report on GAC advice, I think, so that has been removed.
If there aren't any comments, otherwise we'll move on.
Yes, Paraguay.

PARAGUAY:

Page 89 of 162

Thank you, Mr. Chair.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

Going back a little bit with meeting with SSAC, is it possible to
include there, Mr. Chair, IPv6 and IPv4 issues related to NAT
resolution, to be more specific?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Can we sort this out afterwards, because I don't think that this is
-- let's just try to find a way then to factually report because I
think we need some time for, let's say, political issues -- yeah -and focus on the advice, unless they are easy factual errors.
Thank you.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. There have been some minor updates to each of the
working group reports.

In some cases they have been

shortened. And a report has been included from the public
safety working group, so...
Yes, Argentina.

ARGENTINA:

Thank you, Thomas. There was a doubt of the text for the
NomCom working group. I went through the transcripts and
what was agreed is to work on general criteria, not criteria only
for the board.

Page 90 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

So the proposal is to keep the text as it is unless we have other
comments.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Do we really have to discuss this, given the other issues?

ARGENTINA:

It is in the transcripts. I --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I thank you for the clarification.

Can we leave it as it is?

Otherwise we have work tonight. But Denmark.

DENMARK:

Well, we made a different attempt to persuade the chairman of
the working group to make a little change but it was not
acceptable.
If that change was not acceptable, then we would like the
following words deleted: "There was agreement that the BG" -the first part of it, so we start with, "The working group will
develop." So we delete "the agreement" because there was no
agreement.

Page 91 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Thank you. So your proposal is to say "The working group will
develop draft criteria."

DENMARK:

Yes, sir.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Can we all accept this? Thank you very much. This is
progress. All right.
Thank you. Go on.

TOM DALE:

U.K.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Is it on this one, U.K.?

UNITED KINGDOM:

It was on the public safety text.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. What's your --

Page 92 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

UNITED KINGDOM:

EN

It's literally very short. It's just I'm mindful of the confusion that
has sort of been around over the last couple of months around
sort of the role of the public safety working group, so I would just
suggest taking out the "key DNS and IP WHOIS-related section"
and then just have "the working group continue to contribute to
tracks, including," and then it lists the work.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So your proposal is to delete what Tom is highlighting now?
Can we accept that? Any problems? No? Okay. Let's take it out.
Iran?

IRAN:

What track? If you delete that, what track? Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Maybe we find a better word, because the "including" -"contribute to ongoing discussions on issues including" -It doesn't change anything in the substance.

OLOF NORDLING:

Page 93 of 162

Work streams.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah. Work streams. Can we say "contribute to work streams,
including" and then they are listed? Is that okay? Can we live
with this?
I see people nodding.
Any objections to what is going to be on the screen?
Okay. Thank you very much. We have to move on.

TOM DALE:

Just a note. Having -- the countries nominated by the GAC for
formal membership of the CCWG Work Stream 2 have been
mentioned there as requested.

That's the major change.

There's comments from Canada.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Canada, before I give you the floor -- thank you -- this is in the
understanding that these countries will be available for all GAC
members and observers, in terms of conveying messages and so
on and so forth, and being in contact, reporting, on the one
hand, and on the other hand, note these are just the members.
Every GAC member and observer is allowed to be a participant
and participate, make his or her voice heard, so that this is the
understanding.
Canada, please.

Page 94 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CANADA:

EN

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. My comment was actually
related to the previous section on the independent secretariat
where we had just suggested some very minor additions last
time and they weren't reflected. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Can you read this out again? That was missed.
Thank you.

CANADA:

Sure. So it was "The GAC reaffirmed its view that a sustainable,
independent, accountable, and transparent secretariat," and so
on. Thank you.
"And transparent." Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Is that it, Canada?
Okay. Thank you.
Now we get --

TOM DALE:

Page 95 of 162

Yeah. Sorry.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah.

TOM DALE:

Sorry. There is new text here in the "Other Issues" section.
The United Kingdom submitted text headed "Community-based
gTLD Applications," which reads as you see on the screen:
"Further to the GAC's discussion in Marrakech of the many
problems encountered by community-based gTLD applicants in
the current gTLD round, it was noted that a review of the
experience of these gTLD applications by two independent
experts (facilitated/supported) by the Council of Europe is now
being undertaken. The outcome of this review is planned to be
reported at the next meeting of the GAC with a view to serving as
an input into current community efforts on new gTLDs, including
the new gTLD subsequent procedures policy development
process."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. We discussed this before. That was brought up by
the U.K. by email just before we -- the first reading.
This is not an advice.

It's a piece of information about

something that was shared orally in meetings before.

Page 96 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Is there anything problematic? I don't see -U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Sorry. It's a problem I've created. I've got "facilitated" and
"supported" as alternates and I -- my preference is "facilitated."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we can accept that, if that's the only problem.
Iran?

IRAN:

On the IGO protections, the first line, are we securing the
protection or we request for that?
We don't secure. We are not an entity to secure that, so perhaps
we could say that "The GAC remains committed requiring
protections for."
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Why don't we just say "is committed to the protection of IGO
names and acronyms"? Okay?
The OECD is fine. Let's try and make it as simple --

Page 97 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

TOM DALE:

"Protections" what --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

"To the protections" -- or "protection" -- "protections for" -- "of"
or "for"?

TOM DALE:

"For."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

"For"? Okay. You're the English here.
All right. Further comments?
What was new? Maybe you can help them. The rest was as it has
been before?

TOM DALE:

Yes, that's right.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We agreed on this. This is another new piece that came in by the
U.K. before the first reading. We've discussed that this would be
integrated.

Page 98 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

TOM DALE:

You want me to read it?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah. Please.

TOM DALE:

It reads, "The GAC noted that further consultations were being
undertaken by the GNSO with the board in order to resolve the
remaining differences between GNSO recommendations and the
GAC's long-standing advice that the current provisional
protection of Red Cross, Red Crescent and Red Crystal
designations and identifiers should be made permanent in
accordance with the distinct legal and policy grounds for such
protection. The GAC urges the board to reach a solution as soon
as possible."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. This also reflects our discussions with the GNSO and
with others.
Is that okay?
New Zealand; right? Yeah.

Page 99 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

NEW ZEALAND:

Got it this time.
Just -- yeah, actually, that's exactly what I was going to ask. Red
Crescent in the title.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Can we move on? Now this is the advice part.
Okay.

TOM DALE:

Thank you, Thomas. Good afternoon, GAC.
I had attempted to make the changes that were suggested by
the members immediately before the break. A lot of that went
to trying to shorten the previous text, so I'll just read through it
now.
The GAC advises the Board that, one, the starting point for
development of policy op further releases of new gTLDs should
first take into consideration the results of all relevant reviews of
the new gTLD round and determine which aspects and elements
need adjustment.
addressed.

In addition, the following should be

A) minimum requirements with regard to

interoperability, security, stability, and resilience can be met. B)
an objective and independent analysis of costs and benefits is
Page 100 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

conducted beforehand, drawing on experience with and
outcomes from the recent round. And, c) there is an agreed
policy and administrative framework that is supported by all
stakeholders. All measures available to the Board should be
used to ensure that a comprehensive and measured approach to
further the releases of new gTLDs is taken in a logical, sequential
and coordinated way rather than through parallel and
overlapping effort and/or arbitrary time frames that may or may
not be agreed by all relevant interests.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

This is now fairly shorter than the initial text.
Iran.

IRAN:

Chairman,

why

we

say

"minimum

requirement

interoperability"?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So your proposal is to delete the word "minimum."

IRAN:

Yes.

Page 101 of 162

for

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

I think -- Any objections? It doesn't change the world. It leaves it
a little bit more -- Okay. Let's delete that word.
Any other suggestions?
New Zealand.

NEW ZEALAND:

Yes, thank you.
Just a question about the wording we've got in paragraph 2
where we talk about arbitrary time frames. Just out of respect
of other communities that might consider these time frames
relevant, can we just say "and overlapping efforts that may not
be agreed"? Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think that should be acceptable.
So we delete that part.
Okay. Yes, Spain.

SPAIN:

Do we take away the reference to time frames? We've been
having problems with very demanding time frames. Maybe
"arbitrary" is not right, but can be some other word in English to
say that.

Page 102 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah.

EN

The thing is we have had things about the logical

sequence above, but if the time frame is important, New
Zealand, could we just take out the word "arbitrary"? Is that
probably what you think is not the -- Is that okay? So the time
frames that are not agreed is maybe not what we want. So we
just take out the word "arbitrary," which is probably going a
little bit too far in the tone. Is that okay?
All right. That sounds -- looks acceptable to you.
The rationale is fairly short now so we can actually have it.

TOM DALE:

I'll read it.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Quickly.

TOM DALE:

Live give a reading. Rationale, one, there is currently no publicpolicy reason why further releases of new gTLDs should not
proceed as a general principle. There are, however, valid publicpolicy reasons for applying a range of requirements at the
application and post-delegation stages. The GAC believes such
requirements derive at least in part from ICANN's obligations

Page 103 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

with regard to the global public interest as contained in existing
and proposed Articles of Incorporation and bylaws.
And the second element of the rationale reads: Data is not
currently available to allow a proper assessment, both
quantitative and qualitative, of the round that is now
concluding. Some important data, for -- example, with regard to
consumer safety and security -- may not yet be being collected.
A logical and efficient process means that such data needs to be
gathered before policy development processes move too far
ahead.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think that's fairly clear and short. Is that okay? Can we have
this rationale?
Yes, Iran.

IRAN:

Just read the rationale and to see whether there is consistent
with the advice. I don't see that, but I leave it to you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think it is from what I see, but maybe I'm too tired after all
these days.
Any objection to that text of the rationale?

Page 104 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

When we say that there's no reason in principle to not go, but.
So I think that is coherent with the rest. That first we need to do
the analysis, and then we need to continue.
Okay. Let's go to the next, if there's no objection.

TOM DALE:

Privacy and proxy services accreditation issues reads as follows:
The GAC advises the ICANN board that the recommendations set
forth by the GNSO PDP Working Group on privacy and proxy
services accreditation issues raise important public-policy
issues, highlighted by the GAC in its comments on the PPSAI's
initial report.
The Board should ensure that the dialogue on constructive and
effective ways to address GAC concerns is continued.
If the Board resolves to adopt the PPSAI recommendations, it
should direct the Implementation Review Team to ensure that
the

GAC

concerns

are

effectively

addressed

in

the

implementation phase to the greatest extent possible.
GAC input and feedback should be sought out as necessary in
developing a proposed implementation plan, including through
participation of the Public Safety Working Group on the
Implementation Recommendation Team.

Page 105 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

If, in the course of the implementation discussions, policy issues
emerge, they should be referred back to the GNSO for future
deliberations on potential enhancements to the privacy and
proxy service accreditation.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Iran.

IRAN:

To the previous paragraph of this, yes, at the end of that,
somewhere I see "to the extent practicable." I'm not in favor to
retaining that. The last part. "To the greatest extent possible"
or practicable.

This is always subject to a judgment by

somebody. So delete that portion, please.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran. I think that makes the text actually stronger. So
"effectively addressed in the implementation phase," full stop.
Can we go for with Iran's proposal? No objection. People
nodding. Thank you.
Another one, Iran.

IRAN:

The last paragraph, please. When we say referring the issue
back, only refer it back to the GNSO? Or GNSO in consultation

Page 106 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

with GAC should do something? That is my question, that. Who?
The one who has prepared this should explain why it's only
GNSO.

Referred back to GNSO for future deliberation in

consultation the GAC. We should put somewhere GAC in the
business.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think that makes it better.
After "deliberations," maybe. That was the proposal, but you
are the natives here.
Iran's proposal is "deliberations in consultation with the GAC."
Is that acceptable?
United States.

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Chair.

Actually, on the second point, that is

acceptable. We'd like to go back to the prior comment, though,
made by our distinguished colleague from Iran, and we would
like to retain the text "to the greatest extent possible."
Thank you.

Page 107 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

May I ask you for a reason? Because everything is done to the
extent possible. So what is the value added that you hope to get
with that?

UNITED STATES:

I just don't want to establish an ultimatum or any confusion that
the GAC advice must be implemented.
It seems like that sort of language might undo the prior language
saying that we wanted the recommendations to be put into
place.
Thank you, Chair.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Before I give the floor to Iran, what do the others think?
Canada.

CANADA:

Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I think our preference
would also be to retain it in recognition of the report that has
been developed over the past two years. And that report is
currently before the Board. So recognizing that to the extent -to the greatest extent possible would recognize that any
solution would sort of build on that work as opposed to undo it.

Page 108 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I may see a compromise, saying if we say, "to the greatest extent
possible," could that be acceptable? It's not just to the extent
possible but to the greatest extent possible, and in the end it
doesn't matter but we have something that is verbally in the
middle. Can we live with this? To the greatest extent possible.
That means we really do care but we are reasonable people, and
so on.
Is that okay? Iran, can you live with this?

IRAN:

Chairman, to the greatest extent possible is a general term
covered everywhere, as you mentioned. Why we need to spell it
out in this particular very sensitive issue?
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

To answer you why, because other members are asking for it. So
we need to find a solution that we can all live with.
I personally think it doesn't make so much of a difference.

Page 109 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So should we put it in brackets and come back to this at the
end? Because we have to move on.
U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

I'd just like to agree with the U.S.'s rationale for keeping that in.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Any objection to this? To what you have now on the screen.
Iran.

IRAN:

Chairman, it weaken the process, totally. Whenever you put a
qualifier, it is subject to the judgment of those people.
It says that we have applied to the extent possible. More than
that was not possible to take into account of the GAC comments
or GAC interest or GAC concerns.
I am not in favor of these qualifiers.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 110 of 162

Thank you, Iran.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Peru.

PERU:

The problem I find with this is that who decides when you have
reached the greatest effort?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

But then who decides what is effectively addressed? In this
organization, in the end, the Board decides. We give advice.
So let's put it in brackets and continue. We can come back to
this later.
Thank you.
We haven't read the rationale yet. Okay. Thank you, Tom.

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone).

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

No, there is not anymore.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. In its comments -- I'm just reading the rationale as
drafted on the screen now.

Page 111 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

In its comments on the privacy/proxy services accreditation
issues PDP final report, the GAC highlighted public-policy
concerns raised by the working group's recommendations,
notably that one. Law enforcement and consumer protection
authority requests for information from privacy and proxy
service providers call for confidentiality as required and/or
permitted by local laws. Two, the PPSAI's definition of law
enforcement authority as governed by the jurisdiction of the
privacy or proxy service provider might imply that service
providers need only respond to law enforcement requests from
within their own jurisdiction while many investigations are
cross-bored.
And, 3, privacy and proxy services should not be available for
domains actively engaged in the collection of money for a good
or service.
Because these GAC comments were not reflected in the PPSAI
final report, the GAC in its Marrakech communique advised the
ICANN Board to allow sufficient time for GAC consideration and
discussion of these issues at ICANN 56.
At ICANN 56, the GAC met with members of the ICANN Board, the
GNSO Council and the co-chairs of the PPSAI working group.
Constructive discussions were held on how GAC concerns with
the

Page 112 of 162

recommendations

could

be

addressed

during

the

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

implementation of the working group recommendations to
avoid the Board receiving conflicting recommendations from
different SOs and ACs.
The discussion highlighted that most of the GAC concerns might
be addressed during the implementation phase.

Specific

measures discussed include, 1, a law enforcement disclosure
framework that could detail the appropriate authorization and
confidentiality requirements for law enforcement requests
linked to ongoing investigations. Such a disclosure framework
could also possibly address processes for privacy/proxy service
providers to respond to requests from jurisdictions other than
their own.
And, 2, a de-accreditation process that could provide the means
to revoke the accreditation of providers harboring actors
engaged in deceptive, unfair, or fraudulent conduct or
repeatedly not responding to law enforcement authority
requests.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tom. This is a rather long text, but it's and a
complex issue. And we have had intense debates, and I think
this is a good rationale that puts in writing what discussed early.
So let me ask you: Can you accept this and can we move on?
United States?

Page 113 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Chair. Thank you for indulging me. I hope that this is
a minor change. To the paragraph which begins "at ICANN 56,"
the U.S. would ask for -- to delete the end of the final sentence
which begins with "to avoid the board receiving conflicting
recommendations." Not sure that's grammatically correct to
begin with. But, secondly, I don't think we want to create a
precedent whereby the SOs and ACs must somehow harmonize
their recommendations before making them to the board.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. And if you read the rest of the text, this is what -- I
think this is okay.

Are we going with the U.S. proposal?

Objections? No. Okay. Let's delete it. Yes.
Other comments, questions? If not, then let's move on. All right.
Now, this is a sensitive issue. It's important to many countries.
We know that. We recognize this. We have given a lot of advice.
If I got the message from our colleague from Iran right, mainly
the new element is that we have always meant this but never
explicitly said that the agreement by a particular country should
be explicit; that this is the key element of this which is the text

Page 114 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

that you find in the middle paragraph that was introduced in the
first reading.
The rest -- the previous middle paragraph has disappeared
because that has not been -- clearly not been consensual and
clearly not been in the coherent line with the previous advice.
So Tom will be reading this. And I ask you to be constructive and
see whether this captures the elements that we want to have in.
And we hope will get this done fairly quickly. Thank you, Tom.

TOM DALE:

Okay. I have made some amendments to this section reflecting
the comments that were made in the open session before the
lunch break. I have not made any other comments -- any further
changes because there were no additional suggestions for text
received. So everything is up until the lunch break.
It reads: "The GAC has discussed plans proposed by registry
operators to mitigate the risk of confusion between country
codes and two-character letters at the second-level codes under
the new gTLDs." That might need to be amended. It's not quite
right, I don't think.
"The GAC cannot offer a consensus view on every measure as
there are divergent opinions in relation to them.

Page 115 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

Unless

otherwise

specifically

mentioned

by

a

given

country/territory or countries, the release of the two-letter name
or code for use at the second level is subject to explicit
agreement to be obtained from the concerned government.
"The GAC advises or considers it be a very useful approach that
the relevant registry or the registrar should engage with the
relevant GAC members when a risk is identified in order to come
to an agreement on how to manage it or to have a third-party
assessment of the situation if the name is already registered."
Those square brackets were in the final paragraph were in the
original text that I received so I haven't changed those. I don't
have any further comment.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tom. Let's stop here.
Can we have the three paragraphs all together on the screen so
that we have the whole picture. Let's quickly take one by one to
see whether there's a problem in any of them.
The first one I think states a fact. That is not -- Yes, Olof?

Page 116 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

OLOF NORDLING:

Actually, the very first paragraph, it doesn't run well when it
comes to country codes.

And I would suggest two-

character/letter second-level domains under new gTLDs.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Could you repeat? Or, Tom, did you get that?

OLOF NORDLING:

I was doing exactly that. Otherwise -- it's a bit long, but at least
it makes sense.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we don't have to discuss this. This is a technical wording
issue.
Paraguay.

PARAGUAY:

Two-character/letter second-level domain sounds kind of weird.
I would erase "letter" and leave "two-character second-level
domains."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Ten points for Paraguay. You're right. Okay.
Spain?

Page 117 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

SPAIN:

EN

It should be two-letter because digit-digit, letter-digit, and digitletter has been (indiscernible).

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

12 points for Spain. The scale goes up.
[ Laughter ]
The lady in the back. Nigeria, I think, right?

NIGERIA:

I just want to get some clarification. When you say "GAC cannot
offer a view on every measure as there are divergent opinions in
relation to them," are there measures that there are a consensus
on?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Actually, I'm wondering whether we should not rather take this
out because what the added value of this may actually rather be
weakening. Is that what you were proposing, Iran?

IRAN:

I was supporting the Chair. We should take out this portion.
GAC cannot do this and this. It is not proper to say we are
disabled to do it. What is the value added of this text? Delete it.

Page 118 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Is that okay? Okay. Thank you.
First paragraph agreed. That states the fact that we discussed
this.
Second one, it's basically -- as I say before, there's nothing new
apart from the fact that we make it explicit that we would like to
have an explicit agreement for those who have an issue with
this. Those who don't, they don't. Can we go with this? I see
people nodding.
Netherlands.
If you don't care, then you don't have to -- it's really only for
those who do. But go ahead, please.

NETHERLANDS:

I didn't understand your question. For those who do?
I would like to come back to the objection we had as
Netherlands and supported by the European Commission that in
this case, we are changing our advice, earlier advice.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I would rather say we clarified it and not changed it because this
has always been the expectation. I think you are under those

Page 119 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

who are otherwise specifically mentioned that you don't have a
problem because we drafted these lists. So those who do not
need an agreement, they are all listed and you are one of them
and a number of others. It covers everybody.
Netherlands.

NETHERLANDS:

The former advice doesn't say something about explicit
agreement or agreement. It says notification. I have not read
anywhere in the former advice that there's a question of
agreement -- or former agreement for governments.
I cannot read it.

If somebody can point me to it, please.

Otherwise, I should have to object. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Iran.

IRAN:

Thank you. In Marrakech, one of the ICANN staff explained to
the people that the way that they interpret the advice is the
following: Letter will be sent to the countries. If they don't
reply, they consider it as agreed. This is what we have problems,
the way it is implemented.

Page 120 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

I don't name that person.

And we raised that point in

Marrakech, and he said that that is that. This is the way we do
that.
And there are many developing countries that they missed that
60 days for one or other reasons. We are not as stable in the
administrative (indiscernible) as some other distinguished
colleagues. We don't interfere with their issues.
They announce at GAC, at ICANN that they have no problem. But
let others that do have issue, they be given the opportunity. We
cannot go further publicly the problem here. But we explained
to the people in private what the difficulty is that.
This tacit agreement is not acceptable to many developing
countries, and I don't know why some distinguished colleagues
pushing to us that we should agree with the tacit agreement. It
is not correct. We are living our rights, our very rights. Please,
let us have our rights. We don't interfere your issues. Please let
us have our issues. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 121 of 162

Thank you. Denmark and then Spain and then Egypt.

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

DENMARK:

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The secretariat have put forward
what have been agreed in previous meetings. And as far as I can
see, the last meeting was in the Dublin communique. There
might be wording we can use there. There is said, "We advise
the board that comments submitted by relevant government be
fully considered regardless of the ground of objection." That is
one thing.
The other thing is be mindful of governments' capacity,
limitation, and ask the board to facilitate some verification of
the process for providing comments to address their concerns,
that was if I heard right a concern from Kavouss.
So if we can use those two words or those two sentences from
the Dublin communique, then we are consistent in our advice.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Spain?

SPAIN:

If Kavouss and other GAC representatives are fine with it, I don't
have any problem.

But I was thinking of another way of

addressing this, starting the sentence with "in spite of the
process being set up by ICANN," I could say some countries
because I think your view is not shared by -- at least it's a
minority of countries. In spite of the process set up by ICANN,

Page 122 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

some countries, we can discuss the qualifier. Stick to the view
that unless otherwise and so on.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Egypt.

EGYPT:

I was just going to -- like Finn, I was just checking whether this is
consistent with previous advice. I think if it does not -- if it is
consistent with our previous advice, then I don't see a problem
leaving it here unless it is in conflict with other previous advice.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. As has been read out by Denmark, what we've been
asking so far is that -- and the word "considered" appears in
almost every element of this advice, that the comments
Singapore, March or whatever that was, 2015, "comments from
relevant governments should be fully considered." That was the
expression.
Then we've been asking for a 60-days comment period. That's
also part of the Singapore advice. And then in Dublin, we said
again we recommend that governments' comments be fully

Page 123 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

considered. That was the expression used. Those are issues of
clarification.
Then Dublin another time says, "Comments submitted by the
relevant governments be fully considered." And that was it.
That was it. That is what the advice so far has asked. So
consideration of the views.
Swaziland. I take Swaziland and then Paraguay. I stop here with
this and we move on with the rest and come back to this later
because we need to see where we are with the rest. Okay.
Swaziland.

SWAZILAND:

Thank you, Chair. I wonder if it would not be useful to skip this
section and finish off with the rest of the document, then come
back to it later because it looks like there's still a lot of issues on
it.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. So we had the same idea.
Is it okay?

PARAGUAY:

Yes, I agree. But, you know,I see a problem with the word
"consider" because you can consider something and then

Page 124 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

decide to do this or to do that or go for years or go for no. You
consider, consider, consider, but still the 60-day period will go
on. What would happen to countries who are non-members of
the GAC, you know, or countries who don't agree? I would
recommend to go back to the original writing. Thank you, Chair.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. We take note of this and move on for the time being
and we'll come back to this at the end. Okay?
Please, Egypt, do you have a solution right now or --

EGYPT:

I have a question. Are we coming back to the whole section or
this specific paragraph?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Whatever. We need to have an agreement on the whole section -

EGYPT:

Okay.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

-- on this whole section, what you have on the screen, right?

Page 125 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EGYPT:

Okay.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Let's move on and come back later.

EN

Three-letter codes. This is the text that I proposed based on the
discussion that we have these two elements. It's fairly short.
Much shorter than before. Please, Tom.

TOM DALE:

Thank you. The text reads, "The GAC advises the board to
encourage the community to continue in-depth analyses and
discussions on all aspects related to a potential use of threeletter codes in the ISO 3166 list as gTLDs in future rounds. In
particular, with regard to whether such a potential use is
considered to be in the public interest or not.
"The GAC advises the board to keep current protections for
three-letter codes in the ISO 3166 list in place and not to lift
these unless future in-depth discussions involving the GAC and
the other ICANN constituencies would lead to a consensus that a
use of these three-letter codes as TLDs would be in the public
interest."

Page 126 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Iran and then the Netherlands and Egypt.

IRAN:

A simple replacement of "encourage" by "urge." Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Next, Netherlands?

NETHERLANDS:

I circulated -- because I think, Chair, you asked me to do so, I
circulated also the wording that maybe Tom has not -- or not
seen it because it was to the GAC list sent, so not specifically to
him.
But I think I was asked to do a very short advice proposal on this,
which basically is for the second part and is less judging advice
as probably -- because this one has some kind of judging implicit
in it which we should like to -- I would like to not have there.
Fairly neutral text.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

NETHERLANDS:

Can I read it?

Page 127 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Yes. Let's put it as alternative to the second text, okay? Second
paragraph.

NETHERLANDS:

Yes. "The GAC advises the board not to lift the current protection
at this stage, comma, and to take up the question whether" --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Slower, Thomas. He needs to type.

NETHERLANDS:

I'm used to the typewriters for the transcripts.
-- "and to take up the question whether the current protection
should be lifted in the policy preparation of the new round of
new gTLDs, in close consultation with the GAC."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

This one is shorter and probably more elegant. So let's take the
first -- the first paragraph first and then we decide between the
two.
Egypt, was your comment on -- yeah. Please go ahead.

Page 128 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EGYPT:

EN

Yeah. I think there is a small typo at the very -- at the first
paragraph, second sentence, "in-depth analysis" with an "i".
"Analysis." Yes.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

That's plural, and it's correct like this, but --

EGYPT:

Is it?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah.

EGYPT:

Okay. Sorry.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

But we'll find -- we'll find the -- Tom will work during the night to
find all the typos so I think that we'll get there.
Are you okay with the first paragraph? That the -- this tries to
say that the -Spain.

Page 129 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

SPAIN:

EN

I would rather go back to the previous verb, "encourage." I don't
-- I don't want the community to rush into doing something that
I don't think is feasible. I prefer "encourage," but there's no
hurry to lift the restrictions --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The announcement is that --

SPAIN:

There is no hurry to have a discussion --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The announcement is that the next round will not be before 2020
so we actually do have some time. Can we agree -- this is really
not fundamental. Can we agree on one of the two words?
I would propose the original word, "encourage," because it's
slightly less -Can you live with that?
This time will be taken away of the time to discuss the other
issue, what we spend on this just so that you don't forget this.
Iran.

Page 130 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

Chairman. You push me something that don't say anything
because we want to discuss two-letter. Okay.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. So "encourage."
Is this paragraph okay?
U.K.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes.

Thank you, Chair.

It's just language with regard to

reference to "rounds" which we're -- we've got here. Can we
change that to "subsequent procedures"? Because --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

It doesn't matter. We're talking about future rounds. I'm sorry,
I'm -- I need to be a little bit like trying to focus on the essence of
it.

UNITED KINGDOM:

But a round is -- has meaning.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

That was the -- that was the word we used in the past year, so
can we live with the rounds, Mark?

Page 131 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Thank you.
Can we -- any objections on the first paragraph?
No. Okay. Now we need to decide between the first -- the
second or the third one. They express the same ideas. One is -they are two different ways.
Iran, please.

IRAN:

I have no problem with the Dutch proposal, provided that in the
last line you replace "in close consultation" with "with the full
involvement of GAC."
Consultation is consultation. You consult me, you take my view,
you don't implement that. That is consultations.
"Full involvement of GAC." Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Can we accept the proposal? Gema?

SPAIN:

I find it, though, to be contradictory. We advise the board not to
lift the protection but at the same time we want them -- we want
them to take up the question of whether the current protection
should be lifted. So I like the first -- the first expression.

Page 132 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Gema, I think -- I think the logic is quite clear. It's probably a
question of also language.
The first element of this paragraph is we advise the board now
not to lift the protection, and the second element -- I think the
Netherlands is actually more elegant than the previous one -- is
to take up the question, so to reassess the question whether
these should be lifted or not once we have discussed everything,
so I think it's -- I think it's fairly clear. Iran?

IRAN:

I'm not defending the Dutch proposal but their proposal is clear.
It is "at this stage." You have not read that. "At this stage."
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So do we have a -- does anybody have a problem with what the
second text says? I think this is the message that we're trying to
give.
Nigeria?

Page 133 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

NIGERIA:

EN

My concern -- our concern is that -- that word "at this stage." So
if it's not going to be rephrased, I think we'll go with the original
draft.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Excuse me. What do you mean with "original draft"? The first
version?

NIGERIA:

The first version, yes.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

If we try to keep on the second version, what is -- not about the
wording but let's capture the idea. We need to have an sense of
--

NIGERIA:

What stage are we in?

UNKNOWN SPEAKER:

(Off microphone.)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So the idea of both texts is to say "unless something changes."
Meaning for now we want to stay with what we are -- have, and

Page 134 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

this question of whether or not to release should be brought up
without prejudice to the outcome. It doesn't say it should be
lifted, but the question whether it should be lifted or not should
be brought up only once the discussion has been held in
consultation with the GAC.
So we are not implying -- contrary to the text that we had this
morning, we're not implying that once it's discussed, it should
be lifted. We just imply that the discussion, the question can be
reasked only once the whole thing has been assessed.
So I hope that makes it clear. Paraguay?

PARAGUAY:

I kind of, you know, had the same concern expressed by Nigeria.
To me, it's a little bit -- you know, the first paragraph is -- is like
more specific because it says, "The GAC advises the board to
keep current protections for three-letter codes," blah, blah,
blah. Other one give -- the second paragraph, you know, gives
the -- gives me the feeling that it might be, you know, somehow
ready to be lifted afterwards or something like that, you know --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 135 of 162

Thank you.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

PARAGUAY:

-- but I can live with both anyways.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think I see your point.

EN

Would it make it better, because we have twice like the "lift," so
if you read it quickly, then you only read "lift," "lift," "lift" and
maybe that is not the impression that we want to give. If we
would say -- still working on the second one, "The GAC advises
the board to keep the current protection at this stage"?
So that for the time being, we keep it, and the question whether
or not to lift it, we can also use the question whether or not to
keep it. Can you try keep it? In substance it doesn't change but
it's -- it's -- this is like one's "keep" and then -- could we agree to
this?
France and then Spain. Please be short.

FRANCE:

Yeah. Thank you, Chair. I actually agree with Nigeria and
Paraguay. I think that the issue is like at this stage it kind of
implies that at another stage it will be lifted, so I would prefer to
keep the previous paragraph, the original paragraph. Thank
you.

Page 136 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

We have nine minutes left. What do we do?
We can jump between the paragraphs, yeah, or we can -- Gabon
and then Norway.

GABON:

Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have a proposal to make and I
propose that we should keep the first part because it reflects the
discussions we held this morning, and so I propose, as it was
said by Nigeria and others, that we should stick to the first
paragraph.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you very much, Gabon.
So it would seem that we would like to keep the first paragraph,
so let's work on this first paragraph and we may make any
additions we deem possible in this first paragraph.
For those of you who were for the second paragraph, I don't
know.
Norway?

Page 137 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

NORWAY:

EN

We also prefer the first of these two paragraphs. And you also
said the key word, "unless," and so I think that sort of
communicates better, in our view as well. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. We have eight minutes left.
Netherlands, then Spain, and then Iran.

NETHERLANDS:

I do not adhere to my text. It was just my homework I did and
there was afterwards another proposal. I don't stick to my text.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Can we live with the first text as it is? Any objections?
Okay. Thank you.
Move on, Tom, and speed up.

TOM DALE:

The final -- the final section of advice to the -- to the GAC -advice to the board: "The GAC advises the board actively to
pursue its engagement with both the GAC and the GNSO on the
issue of IGO protections in an effort to reconcile differences
between GNSO and GAC advice on this topic while remaining

Page 138 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

responsive to concerns laid out in GAC advice since the Toronto
communique; taking into account the number of individuals
who have joined both the board and the GNSO since the GAC
first brought this issue to the attention of the ICANN community,
advises the board to engage the IGOs in its discussions" -- "in its
discussions (both within the board and with the GNSO) where
appropriate, given that the IGOs are the best placed to comment
upon the compatibility of any proposals with their unique status
as noncommercial, publicly funded creations of government
under international law."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Tom.
So there are two new elements here, basically. The first one is to
include that the GNSO is mentioned as being included in this
small group, in this process, and the second element is that
something based on -- on the fact that we realize that a number
of people have changed, to urge the board to include the IGOs in
their deliberations and also in the GNSO's deliberations.
So these are the elements. I don't think they are very critical. I
hope that we can agree to them.
Iran, please.

Page 139 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

Just simply to delete actively. What does it matter? It's always
active, not inactive.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think we can follow Iran, if you agree.
Can we go forward with this text and go back to the last
remaining?
This is -- We've done -- we went through everything now. The
only thing that remains is the two-letter -- two-letter codes;
right? Olof, are you -- okay.
So thank you very much. This was extremely productive. Let's
continue the spirit. We can spoil our coffee break, but I think it
may be worth it, and let's try and find a way out of the twocharacter issue.
All right. These are the three paragraphs that we're having.
Yes, New Zealand.

NEW ZEALAND:

Thank you, Chair. Sorry, just to note, for those who aren't
keeping up with the email list, I have been having a go at some
language that might capture the two different concerns in this
section, and I have circulated it on the list. I can read this out if
the Chair is comfortable with that.

Page 140 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Well, let's give it a try.
Maybe, Tom, you....
Would it replace the whole three paragraphs that we have here
or just one of them or....
Please.

NEW ZEALAND:

It would replace the middle one.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

All right. Let's introduce an alternative to the current middle
one. Go ahead in dictating speed.

NEW ZEALAND:

Okay. Some countries and territories have stated they require
no notification.
For the release of their two-letter codes for use at the second
level. Some other countries and territories have not stated a
preference.

Page 141 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

The GAC considers that in the event that no preference has been
stated, comma, a lack of response should not be considered
consent. Full stop.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.
So what this tries to reflect is that some countries have no
problem with release of their codes; others do. And that no
explicit -- no response should not be considered as consent.
Please, reactions. Does this help us?
I have Swaziland, Paraguay, and Nigeria, and Iran.
Thank you. Swaziland, please, go ahead.

SWAZILAND:

Thank you, Chair. It's a good compromise; however, it does not
go far enough. It must be specifically stated that some countries
require an explicit approval for their two-letter code to be used.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think it may worth -- Would you add a formulation to -formulate that view that you're referring to. Because I think
you're right, it doesn't clearly say that some countries have a
very strong and clear view on this.

Page 142 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

So, Swaziland, do you think you could make -- give us a
proposed text added to that or a modification?

SWAZILAND:

In the second sentence is to say that "some countries require -require that an applicant gets express approval to use their
country code at the second level."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Could you repeat that? An applicant gets express -- express or
expressed? Explicit. Is this the word? Explicit?
Explicit approval.
And then could you repeat, please, what you have. Gets explicit
approval.
Swaziland, help us, please.

SWAZILAND:

Chair, I haven't fully figured it out, but I was just giving a
summary of what I meant.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Page 143 of 162

Anybody else? Iran, please.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

Chairman, legally could say an applicant obtain. Not "gets."
Obtain explicit agreement of the countries whose two-letter is to
be used at the second level.
I'm not in favor of this text but I want to put it there. It is "obtain
agreement, explicit agreement, on the use of the two letter at
the second level --" "of their two-letters code at the second
level."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Paraguay.

PARAGUAY:

Thank you, Mr. Chair. I don't intend to criticize New Zealand or
Swaziland or anybody else, but again, I think the first paragraph
captures better the idea in a clear way, I guess. Because on one
hand, the second paragraph you know gives like internal details
on some countries think that this and some other countries
don't agree with that. And I don't think that's very appropriate
at this stage.
I would, again, go back to the original wording.
Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:
Page 144 of 162

Thank you. Your position is noted.

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

Nigeria.

NIGERIA:

I agree with what Paraguay says, but to the second draft -- text
seems longer than the first and doesn't make any difference.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.
Before I continue to giving you the floor, the difference is that
the second one states that governments have different views on
how to deal with their -- or how others can or could deal with
their country codes.
The first one implies that we would have a consensus over what
is written in the text.
So let me ask -- let me ask all of you whether we have a
consensus on the first text. I see that many would prefer the first
text.
Do we have a consensus on the idea? Not about the wording,
but on the idea of what the text says? Is there somebody that
objects that we would like to see an explicit agreement unless
otherwise specifically mentioned?
Spain.

Page 145 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

SPAIN:

EN

It's not to -- to oppose. It's just to recall that the GAC did advise
in the past at the Singapore meeting, February or March 2015,
that the rule was silence didn't mean approval. And I'm going to
read the sentence.
In the section 7, letter B of GAC advice: A list of GAC members
who intend to agree to all requests and do not require
notification will be published on the GAC website.
This means that only the countries that didn't -- would not
object would not be notified.

IRAN:

(Off microphone).

SPAIN:

You can go to the website and --

IRAN:

Put the text on the screen.

SPAIN:

GAC communique, Singapore, March 12 --

Page 146 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

Kavouss, technology is not so quick. It's human hands that
would have to delete what we have here and search the text and
put it on. So, please, let's stay calm.
Is this about the two-letter codes and not about the country
name?

SPAIN:

Yes, it's about two-letter code.
I can live with this paragraph. It's only to be aware that we are
going back on our previous advice.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay.

Let me ask, any objections in principle on the first

paragraph?
Netherlands.

NETHERLANDS:

Yes, I think I will repeat my objection. And I would react to Mr.
Kavouss saying that it looks like we are denying the right of
somebody or a country. This is not a question of denying rights.
This is a question of consistency, a question of is GAC being
reliable to the outer world and not changing the rules along the
play?

Page 147 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

I mean, it's very clear, there is no explicit agreement as a GAC
advice being put earlier. There are a couple of things.
We cannot just say because somebody at a certain moment in a
certain GAC meeting thinks this should be put in there, then put
in there. It's just not acceptable. Sorry.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. We seem to have different views. We seem to have no
consensus on the first text. We are five minutes into the coffee
break. We have ten more minutes until we have to close the
session because another one is starting here.
So we have two possibilities. Either we take this out and try to
work on this after this meeting in a phone call, electronically,
whatever, or we try to sort this out here, but that would mean
that we would have to agree on an idea. And for the time being,
we don't have consensus on an idea.
There's some who say we want a formulation about an explicit
agreement. Others say this is not in -- this is not the same what
we have been asking before. So we have these two views.
Iran, please.

Page 148 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

IRAN:

EN

Thank you. Could you ask who is seriously against the red text?
Seriously against the red text.
I'm saying that major objection to that. Specify the situations.
Some people say this, some people say that, and that is the
situation.
The only thing I will add at end of that, those countries who want
the explicit agreement should inform ICANN. That's all.
So we don't change anything. We just clarify the situations.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Iran. I think this second text has a higher chance that
we succeed on accepting it in the next few minutes. So thank
you for this proposal.
I see people nodding.
Could you repeat your proposed addition or amendment in the
second text, the one that you just mentioned right now.

IRAN:

Chairman, the paragraph talking of the -- the middle one.
If you put the middle one at the end. Take out in the middle one
saying that "some other countries" -- "other countries and

Page 149 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

territories requires that." Take it from "some" and put it at the
end. For the time being, yeah. Yeah.
And then add, "The latter countries are required to inform ICANN
--

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Kavouss. Slower, please. Thank you.

IRAN:

The latter countries are required or are requested or invited,
whatever word you use, are invited to inform ICANN to this
effect.
What does it mean?

The country that wants the explicit

agreement, they should inform the ICANN, "I want an explicit
agreement." That's all.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you, Kavouss.

This might be leading us towards a

solution so let's hope we get there.
So the first sentence says some countries do not require
notification. In case -- the second one states that in the event
that no preference has been stated, this should not be
considered a consent. The third one states that maybe we can --

Page 150 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

some or some others, or others, maybe we can get rid of one of
the words -- some others.

IRAN:

Legally some others. Some, some others. Equality.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. There's some others that require an applicant obtains
explicit agreement. And in that case, these countries should
announce that they are part of this.
I think there are all the elements there that we have heard.
I will give the floor to you, Swaziland, in two and a half seconds.
Can we agree to this, Swaziland?

SWAZILAND:

Thank you, Chair. I think the problem with that, the latter
countries must be the ones informing ICANN, the problem is that
a lot of them are not here. They are not aware of this condition.
Some of them, as were previously pointed out, are not even
members of GAC.
So would it be a problem if it is just a blanket requirement that
anyone who wants to use the two-letter code informs or
requests permission from that government so that if it's a
government that has no problem at all, they just get the

Page 151 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

approval to go ahead. If it is a government that is on the other
side, will either not respond or -- which is, again, a refusal, or
give an express refusal.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Before giving the floor to all of you, what if we delete
the last sentence and if we leave it at that. We have all the
elements in, but we don't say in which direction this goes.
And we have the phrase in that a lack of response is not consent.
So we have....
Please, Tom, take it out and give everybody a chance to look at
this.
Can we accept this? Any objections?
No objections.
No objections. Still no objections. Agreed. Okay. Do we need to
-- now let's go to the third paragraph. That is -- I think it's a
question of wording. Yes, Kavouss.

IRAN:

This is part of advice and we should keep advice but not
consideration. To delete the parenthesis and so on and so forth.
GAC advises that and so on and so forth.

Page 152 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

But should we leave the "should?"

IRAN:

Yes --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The thing would read, "The GAC advises that a relevant registry
or registrar should engage with the relevant GAC members when
a risk is identified in order to come to an agreement on how to
manage it or to have a third-party assessment of the situation if
the name is already registered." Any objections? Okay. Very
briefly. We have four minutes left before the coffee break is
over. Denmark. Spain. That's it for the time being. Denmark
and Spain.

DENMARK:

Thank you, Chairman. For me it looks a little strange that we
advise. Are we advising the board or -- so I think logically the
better was -- it was better to have there: "Or GAC encourage the
relevant" -- we could use that phrase.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

I think you have a point there. Should we say, "The GAC advises
the board to urge the relevant registrar" blah, blah, blah "to

Page 153 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

engage"? That is the logic that we normally use, right? So let's
wait until we have it on screen. "To urge the relevant" -- "to
engage" instead of "should." Is this it? Any objections? Spain.

SPAIN:

It is not consistent with the previous paragraph. It would say
that if a country doesn't say anything the country code cannot
be used alone, why do we need discussions with the registry or --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We say that some countries have that position, which is not the
same, and the fact is some -- some of these have been
delegated. And this is a way to try and get people to talk
together in cases where this has already happened, to give it a
more -- one more try and find a solution. So I don't think it's
inconsistent. Is it okay? Olof?

OLOF NORDLING:

Yes. I think it goes down -- back to the original purpose of our
advice which is about the mitigation measures.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Any objections to this text? No? Okay. That means we are done
two minutes before the end of the coffee break.

Page 154 of 162

CTU and

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

Denmark. Please be short. We have two minutes left. The
United States.

CTU:

Thank you, Mr. Chairman.

I seem to recall there was an

unresolved issue about to the greatest extent possible
somewhere in the document.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yes, you're right. Given the situation where we are in -- let's wait
for Tom. This does not change the world, does it, whether we
have it in or not. So we somehow have to go for either/ find a
third formulation in one minute remaining. CTU, your proposal,
please.

CTU:

Yes. I would say leave out "to the greatest extent possible" and
change "effectively" to "appropriately."

"Appropriately

addressed."

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Instead of "effectively addressed." People are shaking their
heads. I won't go into this. I had Cook Islands and the United
States.

Page 155 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

COOK ISLANDS:

EN

Thank you, Chair. I'm with removing the texts because it's an
effort that I would expect without emphasizing it. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. United States.

UNITED STATES:

Thank you, Chair. Actually I was raising my hand on a point that
I believe does need to be addressed before coffee, I apologize.
But on the matter at hand here, we would prefer retaining "to
the greatest extent possible." We think that removing it could
be construed as saying that somehow the recommendations
would not be implemented. I would like the floor again on a
different point, after we resolve --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah.

UNITED STATES:

Okay.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So we have some that wants to delete the text, we have others
that want to keep it. That is not consensus, so we have to find a
solution. I start one -- who -- are you still insisting, U. S., to keep

Page 156 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

that in? You haven't been able to convince the others that this
addition is necessary.

UNITED STATED:

In fact, Chair, several came in during the previous discussion,
when we were talking about it before at the break, several
people expressed their support for the language.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Paraguay.

PARAGUAY:

I suggest we keep it as well, Mr. Chairman. Because it doesn't
change the world, keeping that phrase, "to the greatest extents
possible," you know.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Okay. Can we keep it in? Any severe objections to keep it in?
Iran.

IRAN:

No, keep it in and go ahead and finish because you have to finish
3:30, otherwise you will receive a red card because you push us
3:30. It is about 3:30.

Page 157 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

EN

I'm in your hands. Any objections to keep that text in? Thank
you. The U.S. has another point. Please.

UNITED STATES:

I do, and I'm terribly sorry, Chair. But on the rationale section of
the two-letter code, which we never got to -- well, perhaps I can
ask you a question. Can you just tell me the status of the
language that's in the brackets?

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Good point. Actually we haven't discussed it, so sorry for those
who are in the room but this is a live -- it's not a TV show, it's a
live GAC event. So this maybe helps to capacity building on how
we work. If you give us five more minutes, we are almost there.
Do you want to quickly read it, Tom, and then we'll see.
Denmark, do you have something that we need to know now?
Okay.

DENMARK:

What I have indicated before, but I actually think it should be
deleted because we are trying here in the rationale to -- to give
an advice to the board, which is wrong here. We should give a
rationale and not give an advice in the rationale. So --

Page 158 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

About this rationale that Tom is about to read.

DENMARK:

Yeah. And we think it should be deleted.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

The whole rationale, so we won't have a rationale but we --

DENMARK:

No, here in the rationale we're giving advice to the board, which
is the upside down.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

That would save us some time. Maybe we can just refer to the
previous advices that we've been given on this issue and say
that this is a follow-up advice. Would that help us? Or do we
need to read it through and discuss it? Can we -- can we delete
it? Because it's not new. We've been working on this for quite
some time. Can we agree that the rationale -- we trust Tom that
he will say this is a follow-up advice based on a discussion and
blah, blah, blah, and refer to the previous advice? And say this is
a clarification of previous advice. Is that acceptable? Spain, can
you live with this?

Page 159 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

SPAIN:

EN

Yes, but it is about a three-letter code rationale. We need a new
one. I sent --

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

That was the two-letter code. We're on the two-letter code.

SPAIN:

Yeah, but that's the note on the three-letter code we need a new
rationale, and I provided that text on the email list.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

We're on the two-letter code now. Let's not talk about the threeletter code. So do we agree that we use this rationale reference
to the old advice and say we had a discussion and this is the
neutral -- Netherlands. We have to close, so thank you.

NETHERLANDS:

The first part, a meaning of the rationale is not affected by the
change of language and it doesn't give an advice. I think the first
part is still valid. It's about the second part which then should
only be deleted or changed. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Tom, can you quickly read it otherwise, I think people are
confused. We don't have the time. Can we go with what I

Page 160 of 162

EN

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

proposed? We make reference to previous advice, say we have
discussed this? We have no time for going into the rationale.
Okay. Three-character code. Do we discuss the rationale -- have
we discussed this? Do we need to rediscuss it?

TOM DALE:

It's for the -- (Off microphone).

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Yeah, the rationale -- the rationale of the -- to the three-letter
code is maybe not 100 -- we haven't had the time to check
whether this is matching the text above. We are not forced yet
to give a rationale. Can we just said the GAC had a discussion
and thinks this is an important message to give, for the sake of
time? Okay? With the three-letter code? And the discussion will
continue. We're at the beginning of this. This is not the last
stage. Okay? Because otherwise, we will continue for very long.
Okay. Is that all? Any further things that we should finalize? I
think we have done all -- are you in agreement? Is this the
communique?
Thank you very much. We had very little time to discuss a
number of things. We ran moderately, extremely slightly over. I
think this is a big achievement.

I thank you all for your

constructive spirit that we got to a consensus on so many issues

Page 161 of 162

HELSINKI – GAC Communique Drafting Session

EN

in so little time. And sorry for the rest of the audience, but that
was an experiment. Thank you. And I think it worked. So thank
you very much.
[ Applause ]
And while I get some coffee, we have something nice to share
with you now. I think Tom should do that. Maybe quickly
explain what it is before you announce the person.

TOM DALE:

Door prize. I have a -- I have a -- I have a door prize -- we have a
winner for the door prize. I'm sorry, it's a serious matter. This
was an effort to encourage recording of attendance. Thank you
all for participating. The winner of the prize being held up with
some lovely reindeers heading across the Finnish countryside is
Christopher Hemmerlein from the NTIA.

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 162 of 162

