HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)
Monday, June 27, 2016 – 14:00 to 15:00 EEST
ICANN56 | Helsinki, Finland

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

So let's move on right away to the next session, which is led by
the Board-GAC Recommendation Implementation Working
Group, which is the revival, the resurrection of a zombie that we
had earlier in our history. That was the one that was formed to
help implement the recommendations in cooperation between
the Board and the GAC of the ATRT, the accountability
transparency reviews that were made. And we're very happy to
have Manal again with us and also Markus to help us try and
implement

the

recommendations

or

discuss

the

recommendations that we have to try to make our GAC advice
more effective.
So let me hand over the floor to whoever of you two would like
to start.

MARKUS KUMMER:

It's Markus Kummer speaking. Yes, thank you, Thomas, and
good afternoon. It's my pleasure to be here with you, but we
have very limited time. We were told to leave the room a little
bit in advance because there will be a CCWG. So we have three-

Note: The following is the output resulting from transcribing an audio file into a word/text document.
Although the transcription is largely accurate, in some cases may be incomplete or inaccurate due to
inaudible passages and grammatical corrections. It is posted as an aid to the original audio file, but should
not be treated as an authoritative record.

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

quarters of an hour, and for this reason, let me just jump straight
into the matter.
This, obviously, has some history. We will not go too much into
the history, but it is our ambition that we would like to come to
closure with some of the recommendation today. This is a
process. We have a work program, and we hope to have more
clarity in something which is not always that clear.
And with that, I hand over to Manal who has a short
presentation.
Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Markus. And as you mentioned, we have tight time,
so we will try to make a very brief introduction and then get into
substance. So can we go to the next slide, please? The next.
So as mentioned earlier, the Board-GAC Recommendations
Implementation Working Group was created to implement GACrelated recommendations of ATRT1, and the mandate was
extended to implement GAC-related recommendations of the
second Accountability and Transparency Review Team and,
most recently, reconvened to look into effectiveness of GAC
advice.

Page 2 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

The current working group from the GAC side, we have the GAC
chair, we have Switzerland, U.S., Iran, U.K., and myself from
Egypt. And from the Board, Markus, would you.

MARKUS KUMMER:

We have -- the following board members are members of this
working group: Chris Disspain, Erika Mann, Ram Mohan, Mike
Silber, and Lousewies Van der Laan.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Sorry. So if we go to the next slide, please.
So in Dublin, the GAC raised the need to periodically review
whether and how effective the Board has taken GAC advice into
account.
ACIG has helpfully analyzed the issue and prepared a review
report. The report was presented -- was referred -- was attached
to a letter from the GAC to the Board, and the Board referred the
issue to the BGRI working group to analyze and develop their
recommendations.
So if we go to the next slide. The following one, please.
The key findings of the report were that in some cases, it is
extremely difficult to determine whether or not ICANN Board has
accepted GAC advice; and where there is clear evidence that the

Page 3 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

advice has been accepted, to what degree it has been
implemented; and whether or not the GAC feel the
implementation adequately meets GAC's original intent.
So can we go to the next slide, please.
So this is the work plan. We decided to start quickly with the
work plan so that you can recognize what's needed from you
during this working session when we discuss the specific
recommendations in more details.
So, Markus, would you like to talk about the work plan first?

MARKUS KUMMER:

As you can see, we have hopefully listed three issues where we
hope to come to closure at this meeting.
We have the fourth issue, logging and tracking mechanism,
where we will have a presentation I think this coming
Wednesday by ICANN staff and then we hope that we can come
to closure to two more recommendations by the time we meet
again in Hyderabad.
And the trickier one, that’s actually how to implement. They will
be left until after Hyderabad. But hopefully, let's start with what
is easy and pick the low-hanging fruits.
Over to you.

Page 4 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

MANAL ISMAIL:

EN

Thank you, Markus.
So if we go to the following slide, please.
So this is the first recommendation from the ACIG report which is
review and make clear to all parties what forms of
communication from the GAC comprise GAC advice.
And we thought discussion of the different recommendations
should target that we have a common understanding of the
recommendation and the approach that should be followed;
identify the implementation elements or deliverables; the time
frame, as Markus had already highlighted, and responsibilities;
and finally, how to have this recommendation documented and
institutionalized within the overall process.
So I have to mention here that this issue was raised also as early
as in the Accountability and Transparency Review Team 1. And a
definition has been reached and posted on the GAC website. So
if we can have the definition on the screen, I think this may be
helpful to refresh colleagues' minds on this.
So the question here is is this not satisfactory or was it
satisfactory before but not anymore now in or is it satisfactory
but not known to people that this definition already exists.

Page 5 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

So I think this should be our starting point here for this
recommendation. We can review this definition and see how we
can make it visible and known to people that this already exists
so that even when time passes and people change, things are
handy and accessible.
So do we have any comments now on this existing explanation
of what constitutes a GAC advice?
Jorge, please, Switzerland.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you very much, Manal. I think that it comes to me as lowhanging fruit, as Markus said, that perhaps we could insert this
as a kind of part of a disclaimer in our communiques or in our
communications which are intended to be advice as small print
at the end of the document. That would be quite handy. Or a
link to this definition.
Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you. I think this is a useful suggestion. So any other
reactions? And please also, ACIG, if there is something that
needs to be clarified or why this specific recommendation was

Page 6 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

put in place, please feel free to chime in anytime. So Iran,
please, Mr. Arestah.

IRAN:

Thank you, Manal. I think it might be known to everybody, but
at least in the CCWG in or in activities, elements also was added
to the GAC advice and may be useful to take -- take that into
account, what the GAC advice should contain? One element, for
instance, was it should contain to have a rationale. This is one
thing that it should ensure that it is consistent with the bylaw. It
may be self understood but perhaps it has been taken into
account in one way or the other. So thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Iran. Another useful suggestion. So we -- we need to
edit this description and add to it, what should be included in
the GAC advice, like you mentioned, a rationale consistent with
the ICANN bylaws and whatever other pieces that we can
identify during the discussion. Okay, Iran again.

IRAN:

Yes, one more element, perhaps known by colleagues. If the
GAC advice is taken by consensus, it should be mentioned. If it is
not consensus, it should also be mentioned. Or if you mention
that this advice is approved by consensus means that the other

Page 7 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

advice has a difference. So it is a very important element.
Maybe not exactly now, but as soon as we get into the new area,
this is very important to treat that because each of these type of
advice has different treatment by the board. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you again, Iran. And if you would like to -- I already took
note, but if you would like to share this in writing over email, it
would also be very helpful. So yes, Anders, Sweden, please.

SWEDEN:

Thank you, Manal. One thing as well that I didn't see in the brief,
I was wondering if you had been discussing any way of
referencing GAC advice to have a unique reference to each GAC
advice so that it's easily traced and easily found. Thanks.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you.

So you mean this should be also here listed

somewhere in the description of what constitutes GAC advice or
generally speaking that whenever we're logging GAC advice we
have a unique reference?

Page 8 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

SWEDEN:

EN

I don't know if -- if it would be necessary to list it here or if it
should be a part of our own working methods. I don't have an
answer for that. I'm just concerned that it's easily identified.

MANAL ISMAIL:

So fair point. Let's try to -- to write something and then share it
on the mailing list and make sure that it grasps the input we
received until now. Yeah, like Markus mentioned, it's going to be
already part of the tracking system, how we log the GAC advice
and how we retrieve it, sort it, and search it. And that's why I
was asking whether we need to write this down or it's already
going to be there.
So any further comments? Yes, please, Thomas.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. I think there are a few things that we should -- we
should note. First of all, I've been checking in the operating
principles. There we have an article provision of advice to the
board that does not go into too much detail about what advice
is. We have the bylaws that are about to be changed that will
enter into force at some time. And then we have our own -- and
we'll discuss this later -- we have our own process of reviewing
the operating principles and we have to get a clear
understanding which is the right track for this particular piece of

Page 9 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

this work so that we -- we don't work in parallel or we don't go in
different directions. So we probably would need some -- some
thinking about who does exactly what and when and based on
which documents like the bylaws and this. So we don't -- do not
necessarily have to have this as part of the operating principles
discussion. We can also say that this group will take care of the - this definition but this is something we will need to consider, I
think. And then also in particular, like the key question for now
is, is it worth working on this based on the old bylaws or do we
have to wait until we have something new so -- until the new
bylaws are formally in place. So I think there's a few things that
we would need to consider or I'd like to hear your views on.

MARKUS KUMMER:

I think Iran's suggestion was very helpful actually, to be explicit,
that it has to be consistent with the bylaws and that would then
incorporate by reference also the new bylaws. But I note that we
do seem to have a consensus on the broad principles, what this
GAC -- and the whole process leading up to this was very helpful
as we had also phone calls and where we discussed examples.
And I think one word is very important, that any explicit advice.
Maybe in the past the communication was not always explicit
enough saying this is actually GAC advice. But I would -- yes,
Kavouss has a question or comment.

Page 10 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

IRAN:

EN

Yes, just want to confirm what you said. We should be very clear
whether we give an advice or whether we give a communication
to GAC -- to the board. Sometimes it's mixed up. So board
should know really what we are doing, because GAC advice, with
capital A, has a very specific connotations and meaning. So we
should be very clear with the board what we are doing. So I
think that's just something to take into account. I just wanted to
confirm what you said. Thank you very much for raising that
point.

MANAL ISMAIL:

So any further comments on this specific recommendation? If
not, then maybe we can go to the following slide on
recommendation 2, which states, "Decide and describe the
intended public policy outcome of each piece of GAC advice and
include this in the statement of advice itself." So again here, this
is one element. Like Kavouss mentioned, we need to have a
rationale for the advice, also the intended public policy outcome
of each piece of advice. So I wondered here whether we need
some sort of a template that we can easily fill without
overlooking any of the specific parameters we need to fulfill in
writing each and every advice. And there were all -- there was
also one suggestion that the GAC and the board may have some

Page 11 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

sort of an exchange post the communique, meaning that we can
have like a conference call with the board or the board can have
some review mechanism to the GAC advice, to the communique,
similar to the one that's already being conducted by the GNSO,
or maybe have both. So, I mean, this is one thing that we can
discuss here. So Markus and then Iran.

MARKUS KUMMER:

Yes, I was going to say, this is also very much in line what we
discussed before. You have to be very explicit in your advice,
what you expect to be followed. And what you mentioned on
the post contact that's in recommend 3 and we have already
scheduled you can call it a pilot project, have a call between the
board and the GAC after this meeting just to discuss if there are - to clarify what was meant, if there's any advice and that we
actually have this dialogue that we better understand what was
meant with this advice. So there's already something afoot
here, but I would be interested, also, hearing from GAC members
how they see it. But again, I think you cannot be explicit enough.
I think that's the message.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Page 12 of 32

Thank you, Markus. We have Iran.

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

IRAN:

Yes.

Thank you again.

EN

Markus, you mentioned explicit.

I

understand that the clear language also embodied in that.
Unfortunately that is the habit of the government. Whenever we
want to have something on consensus, the language is vague. If
the language is vague it is difficult to understand or to
understand it by the board. So we should try later on from now
on to be as clear as possible and avoid any ambiguity. That is
one important point.
The element of discussions with the GAC and board is important
in area when the board does not agree with our advice at the
first instance. Then they will turn into negotiations. So that is
important. Still we don't know how these negotiations is done.
The negotiations will be face-to-face. The negotiations will be -maybe the chairman wants to clarify the matter. Thank you.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. For -- with your answers. Actually the first step -and we have had some discussions also with the board and in
the board. The first step is not whether they agree or not. But
the first step is actually very simply do they understand what we
mean. And then if they do understand what we mean is actually
the feedback loop, are we sure that they do -- that what they
think what they understand is what we want them to
understand. So I don't want to complicate things too much, but

Page 13 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

it's not so trivial. Because this is -- some percentage of the
problems is a lack of mutual understanding, what do we want,
and it's the way that they intend to follow the advice, is that
actually coherent and overlapping. And then, this is the most
frequent case actually, the occasions where the board explicitly
says no, we will not implement an advice, is a very rather rare
occasion. But normally the -- it's less black and white. It's more
in the understanding and implementing an expectation on up
and so on. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Yes, thank you, Thomas. Yeah, you partially covered my point. I
was going to say that the intention here is to make sure we have
a common understanding whether the response is going to be
positive or negative later. So this is one point.
Now, referencing the clarity of the language, let me just refresh
our minds where the recent misunderstanding came from. We
already have a current structure of the communique, we have
one section that has the header of GAC advice to the board. The
GAC implicitly took it for granted that anything within this
section is considered a GAC advice to the board. But then when
we drafted the language we mentioned the GAC recommends.
So they took it as a recommendation, not as a GAC advice. And I
think this was where the misunderstanding came from. So I

Page 14 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

think it's wise that we -- now that we know that recommends is
problematic, that we stick to some clear language from our side.
I think also we need to be clear what we are requesting from the
board.

I remember one very good example Chris Disspain

mentioned on one of our calls that when the GAC says that we
need the board to consider something, then they should be
considering it and then either taking it on board or not. Then
they have been -- I mean accepted the GAC advice. But if we
require them to do something in specific, then we have to
specify this, not just mention consider. So this is one example of
how clear things should be. So Iran.

IRAN:

Yes, Manal. You mentioned that we should be careful about
what we put in that section. GAC advice should be GAC advice.
If we say for consideration is not advice, it's something else. So
we could not advise the board please consider this because
consideration has a very specific meaning, okay? Thank you
very much. I consider it but I don't like -- I don't want to touch it
at all. So consideration should not be in GAC advice. To take
into account but not consider. Because that is a very -- that is
what I said, we should be very clear on the language that we use
in the commun -- in the GAC advice.

Page 15 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

MANAL ISMAIL:

EN

Okay, fair enough. I see we are all in agreement, and I see
noddings everywhere.
Thailand, please.

THAILAND:

Yeah. And regarding on the time frame that you mentioned, I'm
trying to seek clarification. When you talk about the time frame
for the public comments that you would like the GAC or even the
ICANN board to take in considerations, do you mean that both of
the party to negotiate is harder to set up a time line rather than
we say that this is the time line that we would like to see.
So I'm just thinking about the partnership between us and the
ICANN members, set up a time frame what we would like to see
at the next step rather than to set we would like to see next
three weeks. This might be quite tough for them as well. So
giving a room for discussion and then to sit down together draft
on the time frame and responsibility. So the advice might be
failed

partnership

between

us

as

well.

Is

this

a

recommendation?

MANAL ISMAIL:

So thank you, Thailand, for the feedback. Paraguay, please, and
then Namibia.

Page 16 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

PARAGUAY:

EN

Thank you. I remember we discussed this in Marrakech and
before that in Dublin regarding the kind of verbs to use as my
distinguished colleague from Iran mentioned. One thing is
recommend something. Another thing is requires something.
And then another thing is -- as he mentioned before consider
something. You might consider something and then decide to
do this or that or yes or no. That's a different story, right? That's
one hand.
On the other hand, that would be ideal -- I mean, that list you
have there, common understanding approach, implementation,
deliverables, time frame responsibilities, et cetera, et cetera,
documentation, that would be ideal in a yes situation, a positive
situation.

But what would happen in a negative situation?

That's my concern. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Paraguay.
And sorry for confusing people.
Those are discussion points for this recommendation, not for the
GAC advice.

So when discussing this recommendation, we

should understand it -- have a common understanding of what it
is, how we are going to approach implementing this

Page 17 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

recommendation. It doesn't have to do with the GAC advice. So,
sorry for the confusion.
Namibia.

NAMIBIA:

Thank you, Manal. I was just -- I just -- I was just listening to the
phrases and comments made in terms of we need to be specific,
we need to be clear on what advice we are giving. Now, when I
look at the recommendation, I see "decide" and "describe." It's
with the "describe" part, I think, where we need to be cautious
because it says "intended for public policy outcome." To decide
is fine, but to describe will probably lead us into the abyss or the
Pandora box of what is public interest, what is policy. To be very
clear then, when we describe public policies in the outcomes, we
need then to go into the description of what is public interest
also. And that egg is still closed. I don't know whether the
chicken or the egg was first. But public policy is still under -- or
public interest is still under discussion. The definition there may
pose some challenges for us should we decide and describe the
outcome. Maybe it's clear for other members. But I just wanted
to raise that. Thank you.

Page 18 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

MANAL ISMAIL:

EN

I think it's not describing the outcome per se but rather
describing what is the public policy aspect in this advice and this
is why we are providing such an advice. So I think it has to do
somehow with the rationale. So it's the rationale behind this
advice because it's going to address this certain public policy
aspect. So it's not easy to say it theoretically. But maybe when
we start working with this in mind, we could -- it can better -- it
can be understood easily.
So, Switzerland, go ahead.

SWITZERLAND:

Thank you so much, Manal.
And you just said more or less what I was intending to suggest.
In the end, what we intend is very much the rationale of the
advice we give. And I think this will hopefully help the board to
interpret the sometimes cryptic -- (laughter) -- wording of the
advice if it comes with the rationale so they can better
understand where we are aiming at. Perhaps the wording of the
advice as such may have some vagueness for reasons of
consensus finding but also a vagueness sometimes to let the
board and the staff find the best means of implementing
something which is on a principle's level.

Page 19 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

So I think that the rationale really speaks to this
recommendation as you said. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Switzerland.

So I think before moving to the

following recommendation, the question now is we're almost in
agreement on what needs to be fulfilled in a GAC advice, how to
make sure that this is fulfilled each time we provide an advice.
So should we have some sort of a reference communique or a
template that already have a link to the GAC advice in the
description, in the footer or something that already have the
different parameters that need to be fulfilled in each GAC advice,
like clarity rationale, intended public policy, implementable
elements, and so on? Or how can we make sure that we stick to
what we agree, basically?
So, Switzerland.

SWITZERLAND:

Sorry for coming back. Perhaps it's a no-brainer. But I would
recommend that we ask our efficient, independent secretariat to
make sure that this structure underlies the drafting of our
advice. Thank you.

Page 20 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

MANAL ISMAIL:

EN

Yeah. I fully agree. But I was talking even longer term, when we
change, the secretariat change, anything changes. So we need
this somewhere for even everyone to know and to stick to.
But, Thomas.

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Just to pick up something that Tom and I have been
discussing while listening to you, one thing we could do is we
could actually develop -- and I think you mentioned it already.
We could develop a template for GAC advice with some elements
like one is the rationale. The other one is the actual piece of
advice.

Another

one

is

some

expectations

about

implementation, maybe also an expected time frame as part of
the advice. That would help us preparing pieces of advice for
meetings but also if you have a letter, for instance, where we
would -- in order to make clear what is in advice, we would have,
like, an accompanying letter and then that template as the piece
of advice that would go with it.
And if that works, people -- the other side would also get used to
that template and to the logic and the understanding. So I think
-- because we are getting a new Web site, maybe this could be
something that -- I know that those who are dealing with the
Web site are listening to this discussion, so that we can have
such a template on the Web site as a sheet that explains how

Page 21 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

advice is put together with the different elements. I'll stop here.
Yes.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Thomas. Yes, I fully agree.
Paraguay.

PARAGUAY:

Thank you, Manal. I was going to mention exactly that. If you
add that link to the GAC Web page, it would be a very easy way
for any GAC member to have access to the rationale and to the
template and to -- I think it's a very good idea.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Paraguay.
So, so far we have -- we're going to refine the description of the
GAC advice with the help of Iran and whoever else who would
like to volunteer.

And we will circulate this reviewed

description.
We will work, I think, with the help of the secretariat to develop a
template for the GAC communique. I hope this is okay. And
there is also a proposal that we have a pilot for GAC board call
post the communique to make sure we have a common

Page 22 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

understanding of whatever we have provided of advice in the
communique.
So the following recommendation, please, if we go to the next
slide, which is also again within each piece of advice, articulate
the separate implementable elements. Again, I have to say that
this has already also came up during the first Accountability and
Transparency Review Team discussions, and that's why we
decided to bulletize the different pieces of advice to make sure
that no one part of the advice is overlooked. But obviously in
practice when this advice is logged into the registry, it goes into
one record. And this is how it becomes more difficult to track
the separate pieces of the GAC advice.
So I think this is the merit behind this recommendation. And I
leave it at this and open the floor for discussion.
Anders, please, Sweden.

SWEDEN:

Thank you. It would be wonderful if we could do this and all the
other things. Speaking from experience, though, we tend to
satisfy when we're writing GAC advice. We use the term and
energy that we have available, sometimes till 2:00 in the
morning. Maybe we will need to work til 4:00 in the morning or
6:00 in the morning because this is also -- it will open -- the more

Page 23 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

precision we will require from our advice, which is desirable to
have, but the more time I fear it would take to write them as
well, to negotiate them.

It opens area of new issues to

negotiate.
So I think we need to find the level which is reasonable that we
can deliver and not to set too hard, too strong, not to set the bar
too high so that we won't be able to deliver. Maybe then we
won't reach any.
It would be desirable to have this and many other things. But
can we reasonably expect to be able to deliver it? Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, Anders. Good point. So, again, if -- two options here.
We can either not specify the implementable elements or write -for the sake of the template right now, write implementable
elements, if applicable. I mean, sometimes you cannot foresee
how the implementation would go so you cannot really specify
the different parts. So we can put a placeholder for now and see
how things would go. I'm flexible.
So, Thomas and U.K.

Page 24 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

CHAIR SCHNEIDER:

Thank you.

EN

I think Anders from Sweden is making a very

important point. So we should have this structure, but we
should not be too prescriptive in how we are actually filling this
structure.
But this is not completely new. If you look at past advices in
communiques and in letters, you have normally many times
something like a rationale that is in prose or text and then you
have some -- it just is not in a bullet form of bullet points. But
sometimes we even do have bullet points already now that you
could say these are implementation elements. So the idea is just
to be a little bit more structured in the presentation of this.
But it will never be a legal text like A2, B, C, D, (indiscernible),
quarter, and so on and so forth. So we should definitely not go
there because that is not going to lead us anywhere.
And one element I think we need to be aware of is we probably
have to go -- and this is why we are trying this with this zerodraft communique this time. We probably have to go with
asking people who want to suggest that we have an advice of
starting this before the meeting, which is something that is very
common in other institutions, in other fora that you have draft
resolutions, draft text circulated before, and we may have to,
like, consider this more or less normal in the future that we will
have these elements before, so that we don't have to negotiate,

Page 25 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

ideally, the rationale, because if we agree on the rationale -there may be cases where we won't, but as much as we can do in
terms of text preparation before the meeting, the more likely we
are to actually deliver.
So that's my answer to you. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

We have U.K. and then Iran.

UNITED KINGDOM:

Yes. Thank you, Manal, and very much on this question of
perhaps there's a kind of risk of overengineering things, you
know, dissecting advice and so on would be time-consuming
and lead to discussions of minutia, and I guess there is a risk of
that, but this recommendation I think is important because
there are instances where you can actually be providing advice
as a committee on -- on an issue which has some complexity.
And as you said, Manal, in your introduction, there have been
instances in the past where we've lost track of elements of
advice, perhaps accidentally, I would add, both from the board's
side perhaps as well as from the GAC side.
So identifying elements and elements which may have different
time lines to be able to be implemented I think is important and

Page 26 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

then we can keep track of them effectively in those situations.
So it's a -- it's -- this would apply in some situations, and we
shouldn't, you know, rigorously have to apply this particular
recommendation to every instance of advice.
I'm not suggesting that.
But I think this is a very valuable recommendation, and if we
have some kind of reference system which Sweden mentioned
earlier for elements, you know, that would help as well in terms
of tracking a complex piece of advice possibly relating to new
gTLDs or the conduct of a new round and different kinds of
gTLDs and so on.
So that's the kind of situation I'm envisaging. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thank you, U.K.
Iran? And meanwhile, if we can get the work plan on the screen,
place.
Iran, go ahead.

IRAN:

Thank you, Manal.

What you and Kumar put is very good

because they're very high-level instructions or high-level
arrangements. We could put some qualifier in some part of the
Page 27 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

GAC. For instance, when we talk about implementation, we
could put a qualifier on that "where applicable," and so on and
so forth, but that is something we could do.
But I would like to come back to what Thomas says. It's very,
very important. We start our advice when we are in session.
Then we get to the problem of 2:00 in the morning and under the
pressure of the consensus by exhaustion. This is not good.
Perhaps we should take it at the next meeting advice as sort of
an anticipation of advice and so on and so forth. Prepare
something, ask the people to think it over, work during the
meeting, and then we come back, we have at least some
structure, some drafting and so on and so forth. But don't start
at the second day or third day and a half, go to 2:00 in the
morning, and sometimes a pizza, sandwich, or nothing, and
pressure. Thank you.

MANAL ISMAIL:

Thanks, Iran. So if we can go to the last slide because we're
asked to finish a little bit early to have the room set up for the
cross-community session. So if we can proceed to the last -- yes,
please.
So just to confirm that we will fine-tune the GAC current
definition of what constitutes GAC advice and circulate this on
the mailing list.

Page 28 of 32

EN

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

We will work on a template for elements that the GAC advice
have to fulfill, with the help of ACIG and support staff. And I
think we can start working with this template from the following
meeting in Hyderabad, and I think we agree to have a postcommunique board/GAC exchange as a pilot to see how -- how
this would -- would develop.
And just to -- to let you know that following this, we will be
reviewing

and

consolidating

the

logging

and

tracking

mechanisms into a single, transparent, easy-to-access, and
easy-to-manage portal where we can have the GAC advice easily
searchable, referenced, searched, sorted, and so on.
And this links to the new GAC Web site as well. We'll review the
new platform features to ensure the ability to archive, track,
retrieve, search and categorize as I mentioned, review the
existing GAC records and see if the missing detail can be
completed because at some point in time not everything was
fulfilled

in

the

current

registry

system

because

the

responsibilities was not that clear who should enter the data
when.
So all this hopefully by Hyderabad we're going to have a better
picture of this.
The last three activities have to do with the overall picture,
which we need to document the process in a flowchart

Page 29 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

illustrating the checkpoints and roles and responsibilities, but
this is after we agree on the overall process, agree how to
institutionalize all things that we agree upon.
And finally, like Thomas mentioned, we have to investigate the
need to review GAC operating principles in light of the overall
outcome.
So this is to quickly wrap on the work plan and I'll hand to
Markus to -- for the final words.

MARKUS KUMMER:

I have not much to add except to thank Manal for her excellent
work, and also, the fellow board members who were not able to
be in this session asked me to convey their apologies.
Mike Silber who was unable to come to Helsinki, and Lousewies
Van der Laan who has committed to speak in another session,
and Ram Mohan who is chairing the universal accepting session.
They send their apologies.
And with that, I hand over to our chair to close the meeting.
Thank you.

CHAIRMAN SCHNEIDER:

Thank you. Thank you -- first of all, thank you very much. I think
this is a very good example of how a well-organized, well-

Page 30 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

EN

structured 45 minutes can be used very efficiently, so I would
really like to thank you for this because I think we can always
learn from each other and I think this is very well prepared, very
clearly structured, so that was great. Looking forward to moving
on with this.
Just one element. We actually have, this time, a meeting -- a
phone call with the ICANN board which is planned. We're about
to find -- we're in the Google phase of finding a date that suits
the GAC leadership and the board, and it's intended for the
whole GAC to -- it's open to the whole GAC.
So there will be -- first, because we did not have a meeting here,
so actually we used this to have this and then see how this
works, whether we think it's useful, whether the board thinks it's
useful.
I'll stop here because we need to free the room for the crosscommunity session. Sorry for those who are waiting outside.
So, yes. Thank you. As I said, I hope many of us will stay in this
session, those who do not have other obligations, and for the
rest, tomorrow morning 8:15, GAC working group on -- I forget
which one but it's an important one, so please show up.
[ Laughter ]

Page 31 of 32

HELSINKI – Board-GAC Recommendations Implementation Working Group (BGRI)

CHAIRMAN SCHNEIDER:

[END OF TRANSCRIPTION]

Page 32 of 32

Thank you.

EN

