New gTLD Subsequent Procedures – WG Sessions
ICANN56 | Wednesday, 29 June 2016 from 1045-1500

Agenda

1

2

3

Session 1:
Discussion of
overarching issues
and input received

Break/Gap from
1200-1330

Session 2: work
tracks, questions for
consideration, and
logistics

Break until 13301500 session

Here’s a place to
introduce your fifth
agenda item from
your talk.

Here’s a place to
introduce your sixth
agenda item from
your talk.

| 2

Introductions

Face to Face – Session 1
Discussion of Overarching Issues and
Input Received

Overarching Issues
•
•

Questions	sent	to	community	organizations	on	11	June,	requesting	response	by	25	July
• Is	there	any	early	feedback	available?
Topics:
• Additional	new	gTLDs in	the	future.
• Categorization	or	differentiation	of	gTLDs (for	example	brand,	geographical,	or	
supported/community)	in	ongoing	new	gTLD mechanisms.
• Future	new	gTLDs assessed	in	“rounds.”
• Predictability	should	be	maintained	or	enhanced	without	sacrificing	flexibility.	In	the	event	
changes	must	be	introduced	into	the	new	gTLD Application	process,	the	disruptive	effect	to	all	
parties	should	be	minimized.
• Community	engagement	in	new	gTLD application	processes.
• Limiting	applications	in	total	and/or	per	entity	during	an	application	window.	

| 5

1. Additional new gTLDs in the future.
1.a:	The	2007	consensus	policy	above	expressed	the	commitment	to	an	ongoing	mechanism	for	the	
introduction	of	new	gTLDs.		Are	there	any	facts	and/or	circumstances	that	have	changed	such	that	you	
believe	this	should	no	longer	be	the	policy?	Please	explain.
1.b:	Would	the	absence	of	an	ongoing	mechanism	have	an	anti-competitive	effect	for	potential	
applicants?
1.c:	Are	ongoing	mechanisms	for	the	introduction	of	additional	new	gTLDs necessary	to	achieving	
sufficient	diversity	(e.g.,	choice	and	trust)	in	terms	of	domain	extensions?	Please	explain.
1.d:	Is	it	too	early	in	the	review	cycle	of	the	previous	round	to	determine	the	full	range	of	benefits	of	
the	2012	round	of	new	gTLDs?	Should	that	impact	the	decision	to	introduce	additional	new	gTLDs
and/or	the	timing	of	ongoing	mechanisms	for	new	gTLDs?
1.e:	What	additional	considerations	should	be	taken	into	account	before	deciding	on	ongoing	
mechanisms	for	new	gTLDs (e.g.,	to	cancel	ongoing	mechanisms	for	new	gTLDs via	policy	changes)?
1.f:	Any	other	Issues	related	to	this	overarching	subject.

| 6

2. Categorization or differentiation of gTLDs in ongoing new gTLD mechanisms.
2.a:	Should	subsequent	procedures	be	structured	to	account	for	different	categories	of	gTLDs?
Note,	several	possible	categories	have	been	suggested	by	PDP	WG	members,	including:
Open	Registries	
Geographic
Brand	(Specification	13)
Intergovernmental	Organization
Community
Validated	- Restricted	Registries	with	qualification	criteria	that	must	be	verified
Not-for-profit	or	non-profit	gTLDs,	NGOs
Highly	Regulated	or	‘Sensitive’	TLDs
Exclusive	Use	Registries	(Keyword	Registry	limited	to	one	registrant	&	affiliates)	or
Closed	Generics
TLD	with	applicant	self-validated	restrictions	and	and	enforcement	via	Charter	Eligibility	Dispute	
Resolution	Policy,	e.g.	.name	and	.biz

| 7

2. Categorization or differentiation of gTLDs in ongoing new gTLD mechanisms, cont.

The	following	questions	refer	to	this	list	of	possible	categories:
2.b:	Are	additional	categories	missing	from	the	list?	If	so,	what	categories	should	be	added?
2.c:	Do	all	categories	identified	by	the	PDP	WG	members	belong	in	the	list?
2.d:	If	categories	are	recognized,	in	what	areas	of	the	application,	evaluation,	contention	resolution	
and/or	contracting	processes	would	the	introduction	of	categories	have	a	likely	impact?	
2.e:	If	different	categories	of	gTLD are	defined,	should	all	types	be	offered	in	each	application	window?	
Is	it	acceptable	for	an	application	window	to	open	for	only	one	or	a	limited	subset	of	categories	of	
gTLDs (e.g.	a	.Brands	only	application	window)
2.f:	Any	other	issues	related	to	this	overarching	subject:
Specification	13	to	the	Registry	Agreement	(RA)	provides	certain	modifications	to	to	the	RA	for	
applicants	that	qualify	as	a	.Brand	TLD.	For	additional	information,	please	see	the	Specification	13	
section	here:	https://newgtlds.icann.org/en/applicants/agb/base-agreement-contracting

| 8

3. Future new gTLDs assessed in “rounds.”
3.a:	Should	we	continue	to	assess	applications	for	new	gTLDs in	“rounds.”	If	not,	how	could	you	
structure	an	alternative	application	window	for	accepting	and	assessing	applications	while	at	the	same	
time	taking	into	consideration	public	comments,	objections,	evaluation,	contention	resolution,	etc.?
3.b:	How	would	the	assessment	of	applications	in	a	method	other	than	in	“rounds”	impact	rights	
holders,	if	at	all?	
3.c:	Does	restricting	applications	to	“rounds”	or	other	cyclical	application	models	lead	to	more	
consistent	treatment	of	applicants?
3.d:	Should	“rounds”	or	other	cyclical	application	models	be	used	to	facilitate	reviews	and	process	
improvement?
3.e	Do	“rounds”	lead	to	greater	predictability	for	applicants	and	other	interested	parties?
3.f:	Do	“rounds”	add	latency	to	the	evaluation	and	approval	of	an	application,	leading	to	longer	times	
to	market?
3.g:	Do	“rounds”	create	artificial	demand	and/or	artificial	scarcity?
3.h:	Does	time	between	“rounds”	lead	to	pent	up	demand?	
3.i:	What	is	an	ideal	interval	between	“rounds?”	Please	explain.
3.j:	Any	other	issues	related	to	this	overarching	subject:
| 9

4. Predictability

4.a:	Was	the	round	of	2012	sufficiently	predictable	given	external	factors,	while	balancing	the	need	to	
be	flexible?	Please	explain.
4.b:	Do	the	changes	implemented	as	a	result	of	the	establishment	of	Cross	Community	Working	
Groups	and	the	adoption	of	the	principles	and	processes	from	the	Policy	and	Implementation	Working	
Group	suffice	to	maintain	predictability	of	the	application	process	while	at	the	same	time	provide	for	
the	needed	flexibility	to	address	changes	of	circumstances?	
4.c:	What	are	the	impacts	on	applicants,	users		and	related	parties	from	a	process	that	lacks	
predictability?	
4.d:	Any	other	issues	related	to	this	overarching	subject:

| 10

5. Community engagement in new gTLD application processes

5.a:	Are	there	circumstances	in	which	the	application	window	should	be	frozen	while	unforeseen	
policy	issues	are	considered	and	resolved?	If	so,	should	there	be	a	threshold	or	standard	that	must	be	
reached	before	considering	freezing	an	application	window?
5.b:	If	the	Board	is	faced	with	questions	that	cannot	be	addressed	by	the	policy	recommendations	they	
were	sent,	must	the	Board	bring	the	issue	back	to	the	GNSO	and	PDP	process	(e.g.,	the	GNSO	
Expedited	PDP	or	GNSO	Guidance	Process)?
5.c:	Should	a	standard	be	established	to	discriminate	between	issues	that	must	be	solved	during	an	
open	application	window	and	those	that	can	be	postponed	until	a	subsequent	application	window?	
Please	give	an	example.
5.d:	Any	other	issues	related	to	this	overarching	subject.

| 11

6. Limiting applications

6.a:	Should	a	limit	for	the	total	number	of	applications	for	an	application	window	and/or	from	a	single	
entity	be	established?	If	so,	what	should	be	the	limiting	factor	(e.g.,	total	application,	total	number	of	
strings,	etc.)	and	why?
6.b:	If	a	limit	for	the	total	number	of	applications	for	an	application	window	and/or	from	a	single	entity	
is	established,	how	would	the	appropriate	amount	of	applications	be	set	to	establish	this	limit?
6.c:	If	a	limit	for	the	total	number	of	applications	for	an	application	window	and/or	from	a	single	entity	
is	established,	what	mechanism(s)	could	be	used	to	enforce	limit(s)?
6.d:	How	would	a	limit	on	the	total	number	of	applications	for	an	application	window	and/or	from	a	
single	entity	impact	fees?
6.e:	Would	limits	to	the	total	number	of	applications	for	an	application	window	and/or	from	a	single	
entity	be	considered	anti-competitive?		Please	explain.
6.f:	Do	limits	to	the	total	number	of	applications	for	an	application	window	and/or	from	a	single	entity	
favor	“insiders?
6.g:	Any	other	issues	related	to	this	overarching	subject:

| 12

Open Questions

1.	Are	there	further	overarching	issues	or	considerations	that	should	be	discussed	in	the	New	gTLDs
Subsequent	Procedures	PDP	WG	?
2.	Are	there	additional	steps	the	PDP	WG	should	take	during	the	PDP	process	to	better	enable	
community	engagement?

| 13

Discussion of input from cross community session
•
•
•
•
•
•

Update	– Cross	Community	Working	Group	on	the	Use	of	Country	and	Territory	Names
Update	– Competition,	Consumer	Trust	&	Consumer	Choice	Review	Team
Promoting	applications	from	underserved	regions/developing	countries
Community	applications
Geographic	Names	and	other	Names	of	public	interest
Safeguards	/	PICs

Topics	Not	Covered	During	Session
• How	can	implementation	work	proceed	in	parallel	with	policy	development?
• Streamlining	the	.Brand	process	(time-permitting)?

| 14

Face to Face – Session 2
Work Tracks, Questions for
Consideration, and Logistics

Overarching Subjects for which the WG is seeking community comment
• Additional gTLDs in the Future: Should there in fact be new gTLD subsequent
procedures and if not, what are the justifications for and ramifications of
discontinuing the program?
• TLD Differentiation: e.g. Brands, Geos, Communities – Does one size fit all? How
to account for different categories?
• Assessing Future gTLDs in “Rounds” depending on Scale of Demand: What are
the metrics, methods and implications?
• Predictability: Does community agree with WG’s assessment that this does not
require policy development work? Regardless, are there unforeseen
circumstances that would require policy work?
• Community Engagement: Does community agree with WG’s assessment that
this does not require policy development work?
• Limiting applications in total and/or per entity during an application window: Not
foreseen in 2007 policy – what requirements and assessment/enforcement
mechanisms might be needed?
• Others: How can the WG better enable community engagement during the PDP?
| 16

Proposed Work Track 1: Process / Support / Outreach
• Applicant Guidebook (AGB): Is the AGB the right implementation of the
GNSO recommendations for all parties (ROs, RSPs, Escrow Providers)?
• Clarity of Application Process: How can the application process avoid
developing processes on an as-needed basis (e.g., clarifying question
process, change request process, customer support, etc.)
• Applications Processing? Rounds? FCFS? Other window methodology?
• Accreditation Programs: As there appears to be a limited set of technical
service and Escrow providers, would the program benefit from an
accreditation program for third party service providers? If so, would this
simplify the application process with a set of pre-qualified providers to
choose from?
• Systems: How can the systems used to support the New gTLD Program,
such as TAS, Centralized Zone Data Service, Portal, etc. be made more
robust, user friendly, and better integrated?
• Application Fees: Evaluate accuracy of cost estimates and/or review the
methodology to develop the cost model.
• Support for Applicants From Developing Countries
| 17

Proposed Work Track 2: Legal / Regulatory
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Reserved Names List and Mechanism for Release
Base Registry Agreement / Differentiation?
PICs? Is this the right way to implement restrictions?
Registrant Protections
Contractual Compliance
Registry/Registrar Separation
Registrar Non-Discrimination
TLD Rollout
2nd Level RPCs
Global Public Interest / GAC Advice / Safeguards
IGO / INGO Protections
Closed Generics

| 18

Proposed Work Track 3: String Contention / Objections & Disputes

•
•
•
•
•
•

Freedom of Expression vs. GAC Advice, community processes and
reserved names
String Similarity Evaluations (Effective? Fair? Efficient?)
Objections – Review rules around standing, fees, consolidation,
consistency of outcomes? Appeals? Oversight over Process/
Role of Independent Objector
Accountability Mechanisms
Community Applications and Community Priority Evaluations

| 19

Proposed Work Track 4: Internationalized Domain Names, Technical & Operational
•

•
•
•
•
•

Internationalized Domain Names and Universal Acceptance: Consider how
to encourage adoption of gTLDs. Evaluate whether rules around IDNs
properly accounted for recommendations from IDN WG. Determine and
address policy guidance needed for the implementation of IDN variant TLDs.
Security and Stability: Were the proper questions asked to minimize the risk
to the DNS and ensure that applicants will be able to meet their obligations in
the registry agreement?
Should there be non-scored questions and if so, how should they be
presented?
Were the proper criteria established to avoid causing technical instability?
Applicant Reviews: Technical/Operational and Financial: Were Financial and
Technical criteria designed properly to allow applicants to demonstrate their
capabilities while allowing evaluators to validate their capabilities?
Name Collision: What measures may be needed to manage risks for 2012round gTLDs beyond their 2 year anniversary of delegation, or gTLDs
delegated prior to the 2012 round?
| 20

Proposed Work Track 5: Operational Implementation Guidance

•

Subjects TBD – identify subjects that do not require policy development and
where implementation guidance could be provided before PDP is complete.

•

Question: Is there support for a work track such as this, which could be
added to as new subjects are determined to not require policy
recommendations, but would benefit from implementation guidance?

| 21

Proposed Questions
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Are the subjects categorized in a logical manner?
Should any subjects be shifted to another track?
Is there meaningful overlap between subjects or between work tracks?
Are there dependencies amongst subjects that should be considered when
sequencing the WG reviews?
Are there certain subjects that can be determined even now to not likely
require policy development?
With work being managed by sub teams, how will all of the work tracks and
subjects be considered holistically?
Are there data gathering needs foreseen in the near future?
Is there value in having WG members review the Applicant Guidebook to
determine where:
• The implementation was not a result of policy recommendations
• The implementation did not follow policy recommendations
• The policy recommendations requires changes
Is there value in attempting to determine which topics are most important to
resolve (e.g., assign level of importance to topics)?
| 22

Sub Group Logistics

•
•
•
•

When should sub groups begin operations?
What resources are needed?
• Mailing lists, Wiki pages, volunteers for leadership positions, signup
for subgroups, etc.
How will volunteers be collected? Sign up pages on the Wiki?
How often should the sub group meetings be held in order to allow for
volunteers to participate adequately?

| 23

PDP WG Information

¤

PDP WG Wiki: https://community.icann.org/x/RgV1Aw

¤

PDP WG Charter: https://community.icann.org/x/KAp1Aw

¤

PDP Work Plan: https://community.icann.org/x/NAp1Aw

| 24

Annex A
Existing policy recommendations from 2007
Final Report on the Introduction of New gTLDs

2007 GNSO Policy Recommendations: 7 Principles
PRINCIPLES MISSION & CORE VALUES
A
B
C

D

E

F
G

New generic top-level domains (gTLDs) must be introduced in an orderly, timely and
predictable way.
Some new generic top-level domains should be internationalised domain names (IDNs)
subject to the approval of IDNs being available in the root.
The reasons for introducing new top-level domains include that there is demand from
potential applicants for new top-level domains in both ASCII and IDN formats. In addition
the introduction of new top-level domain application process has the potential to promote
competition in the provision of registry services, to add to consumer choice, market
differentiation and geographical and service-provider diversity.
A set of technical criteria must be used for assessing a new gTLD registry applicant to
minimise the risk of harming the operational stability, security and global interoperability of
the Internet.
A set of capability criteria for a new gTLD registry applicant must be used to provide an
assurance that an applicant has the capability to meets its obligations under the terms of
ICANN's registry agreement.
A set of operational criteria must be set out in contractual conditions in the registry
agreement to ensure compliance with ICANN policies.
The string evaluation process must not infringe the applicant's freedom of expression
rights that are protected under internationally recognized principles of law.
| 26

19 Recommendations (1/3)
1

2
3

ICANN must implement a process that allows the introduction of new top-level domains.
The evaluation and selection procedure for new gTLD registries should respect the
principles of fairness, transparency and non-discrimination.
All applicants for a new gTLD registry should therefore be evaluated against transparent
and predictable criteria, fully available to the applicants prior to the initiation of the
process. Normally, therefore, no subsequent additional selection criteria should be used
in the selection process.

Strings must not be confusingly similar to an existing top-level domain or a Reserved
Name.
Strings must not infringe the existing legal rights of others that are recognized
or enforceable under generally accepted and internationally recognized principles of law.
Examples of these legal rights that are internationally recognized include, but are not
limited to, rights defined in the Paris Convention for the Protection of Industry Property (in
particular trademark rights), the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) and the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) (in particular freedom of
expression rights).

4

Strings must not cause any technical instability.

5

Strings must not be a Reserved Word.
| 27

19 Recommendations (2/3)
6 Strings must not be contrary to generally accepted legal norms relating to morality and
public order that are recognized under international principles of law.
Examples of such principles of law include, but are not limited to, the Universal Declaration
of Human Rights (UDHR), the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR),
the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW)
and the International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination,
intellectual property treaties administered by the World Intellectual Property Organisation
(WIPO) and the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property (TRIPS).
7 Applicants must be able to demonstrate their technical capability to run a registry operation
for the purpose that the applicant sets out.
8 Applicants	must	be	able	to	demonstrate	their	financial	and	organisational	operational	capability.
9 There must be a clear and pre-published application process using objective and
measurable criteria.
1 There must be a base contract provided to applicants at the beginning of the application
0 process.
1 [Replaced with Recommendation 20 and Implementation Guideline P and inserted into Term
1 of Reference 3 Allocation Methods section]
| 28

19 Recommendations (3/3)
12
13

Dispute resolution and challenge processes must be established prior to the start of the
process.
Applications must initially be assessed in rounds until the scale of demand is clear.

14

The initial registry agreement term must be of a commercially reasonable length.

15

There must be renewal expectancy.

16

Registries must apply existing Consensus Policies and adopt new Consensus Policies
as they are approved.

17

A clear compliance and sanctions process must be set out in the base contract which
could lead to contract termination.

18

If an applicant offers an IDN service, then ICANN's IDN guidelines must be followed.

19

Registries must use only ICANN accredited registrars in registering domain names and
may not discriminate among such accredited registrars.

20

An application will be rejected if an expert panel determines that there is substantial
opposition to it from a significant portion of the community to which the string may be
explicitly or implicitly targeted.

| 29

Implementation Guidelines (1/5)
MISSION & CORE VALUES
IG A The application process will provide a pre-defined roadmap for applicants that
encourages the submission of applications for new top-level domains.
IG B Application fees will be designed to ensure that adequate resources exist to cover the
total cost to administer the new gTLD process.
Application fees may differ for applicants.
IG C ICANN will provide frequent communications with applicants and the public including
comment forums.
IG D A first come first served processing schedule within the application round will be
implemented and will continue for an ongoing process, if necessary.
Applications will be time and date stamped on receipt.
IG E The application submission date will be at least four months after the issue of the
Request for Proposal and ICANN will promote the opening of the application round.
IG F If there is contention for strings, applicants may:
i) resolve contention between them within a pre-established timeframe
ii) if there is no mutual agreement, a claim to support a community by one party will
be a reason to award priority to that application. If there is no such claim, and
no mutual agreement a process will be put in place to enable efficient
resolution of contention and;
iii) the ICANN Board may be used to make a final decision, using advice from staff
and expert panels.
| 30

Implementation Guidelines (2/5)
IG G

Where an applicant lays any claim that the TLD is intended to support a particular
community such as a sponsored TLD, or any other TLD intended for a specified
community, that claim will be taken on trust with the following exceptions:
(i) the claim relates to a string that is also subject to another application and the claim
to support a community is being used to gain priority for the application; and
(ii) a formal objection process is initiated.
Under these exceptions, Staff Evaluators will devise criteria and procedures to
investigate the claim.
Under exception (ii), an expert panel will apply the process, guidelines, and definitions
set forth in IG P.

IG H

External dispute providers will give decisions on objections.

IG I

An applicant granted a TLD string must use it within a fixed timeframe which will be
specified in the application process.

IG J

The base contract should balance market certainty and flexibility for ICANN to
accommodate a rapidly changing market place.

| 31

Implementation Guidelines (3/5)

IG K

ICANN should take a consistent approach to the establishment of registry fees.

IG L

The use of personal data must be limited to the purpose for which it is
collected.

IG M

ICANN may establish a capacity building and support mechanism aiming at
facilitating effective communication on important and technical Internet
governance functions in a way that no longer requires all participants in the
conversation to be able to read and write English.

IG N

ICANN may put in place a fee reduction scheme for gTLD applicants from
economies classified by the UN as least developed.

IG O

ICANN may put in place systems that could provide information about the
gTLD process in major languages other than English, for example, in the six
working languages of the United Nations.

| 32

Implementation Guidelines (4/5)
IG P

The following process, definitions and guidelines refer to Recommendation 20.
Process
Opposition must be objection based.
Determination will be made by a dispute resolution panel constituted for the purpose.
The objector must provide verifiable evidence that it is an established institution of
the community (perhaps like the RSTEP pool of panelists from which a small panel
would be constituted for each objection).
Guidelines
The task of the panel is the determination of substantial opposition.
a) substantial
b) significant portion
c) community
d) explicitly targeting
e) implicitly targeting
f) established institution
The following ICANN organizations are defined as established institutions: GAC,
ALAC, GNSO, ccNSO, ASO.
g) formal existence
h) detriment

| 33

Implementation Guidelines (5/5)

IG Q

ICANN staff will provide an automatic reply to all those who submit public
comments that will explain the objection procedure.

IG R

Once formal objections or disputes are accepted for review there will be a
cooling off period to allow parties to resolve the dispute or objection before
review by the panel is initiated.

| 34

